


      46 (return) [ Julian, in the Cæsars, taxes him with being
      accessory to the death of Commodus.]


      Lætus conducted without delay his new emperor to the camp of the
      Prætorians, diffusing at the same time through the city a
      seasonable report that Commodus died suddenly of an apoplexy; and
      that the virtuous Pertinax had _already_ succeeded to the throne.
      The guards were rather surprised than pleased with the suspicious
      death of a prince, whose indulgence and liberality they alone had
      experienced; but the emergency of the occasion, the authority of
      their præfect, the reputation of Pertinax, and the clamors of the
      people, obliged them to stifle their secret discontents, to
      accept the donative promised by the new emperor, to swear
      allegiance to him, and with joyful acclamations and laurels in
      their hands to conduct him to the senate house, that the military
      consent might be ratified by the civil authority. This important
      night was now far spent; with the dawn of day, and the
      commencement of the new year, the senators expected a summons to
      attend an ignominious ceremony. 461 In spite of all
      remonstrances, even of those of his creatures who yet preserved
      any regard for prudence or decency, Commodus had resolved to pass
      the night in the gladiators’ school, and from thence to take
      possession of the consulship, in the habit and with the
      attendance of that infamous crew. On a sudden, before the break
      of day, the senate was called together in the temple of Concord,
      to meet the guards, and to ratify the election of a new emperor.
      For a few minutes they sat in silent suspense, doubtful of their
      unexpected deliverance, and suspicious of the cruel artifices of
      Commodus: but when at length they were assured that the tyrant
      was no more, they resigned themselves to all the transports of
      joy and indignation. Pertinax, who modestly represented the
      meanness of his extraction, and pointed out several noble
      senators more deserving than himself of the empire, was
      constrained by their dutiful violence to ascend the throne, and
      received all the titles of Imperial power, confirmed by the most
      sincere vows of fidelity. The memory of Commodus was branded with
      eternal infamy. The names of tyrant, of gladiator, of public
      enemy resounded in every corner of the house. They decreed in
      tumultuous votes, 462 that his honors should be reversed, his
      titles erased from the public monuments, his statues thrown down,
      his body dragged with a hook into the stripping room of the
      gladiators, to satiate the public fury; and they expressed some
      indignation against those officious servants who had already
      presumed to screen his remains from the justice of the senate.
      But Pertinax could not refuse those last rites to the memory of
      Marcus, and the tears of his first protector Claudius Pompeianus,
      who lamented the cruel fate of his brother-in-law, and lamented
      still more that he had deserved it. 47


      461 (return) [ The senate always assembled at the beginning of
      the year, on the night of the 1st January, (see Savaron on Sid.
      Apoll. viii. 6,) and this happened the present year, as usual,
      without any particular order.—G from W.]


      462 (return) [ What Gibbon improperly calls, both here and in the
      note, tumultuous decrees, were no more than the applauses and
      acclamations which recur so often in the history of the emperors.
      The custom passed from the theatre to the forum, from the forum
      to the senate. Applauses on the adoption of the Imperial decrees
      were first introduced under Trajan. (Plin. jun. Panegyr. 75.) One
      senator read the form of the decree, and all the rest answered by
      acclamations, accompanied with a kind of chant or rhythm. These
      were some of the acclamations addressed to Pertinax, and against
      the memory of Commodus. Hosti patriæ honores detrahantur.
      Parricidæ honores detrahantur. Ut salvi simus, Jupiter, optime,
      maxime, serva nobis Pertinacem. This custom prevailed not only in
      the councils of state, but in all the meetings of the senate.
      However inconsistent it may appear with the solemnity of a
      religious assembly, the early Christians adopted and introduced
      it into their synods, notwithstanding the opposition of some of
      the Fathers, particularly of St. Chrysostom. See the Coll. of
      Franc. Bern. Ferrarius de veterum acclamatione in Grævii Thesaur.
      Antiq. Rom. i. 6.—W. This note is rather hypercritical, as
      regards Gibbon, but appears to be worthy of preservation.—M.]
