
      39 (return) [ The Celtic was preserved in the mountains of Wales,
      Cornwall, and Armorica. We may observe, that Apuleius reproaches
      an African youth, who lived among the populace, with the use of
      the Punic; whilst he had almost forgot Greek, and neither could
      nor would speak Latin, (Apolog. p. 596.) The greater part of St.
      Austin’s congregations were strangers to the Punic.]


      40 (return) [ Spain alone produced Columella, the Senecas, Lucan,
      Martial, and Quintilian.]


      41 (return) [ There is not, I believe, from Dionysius to Libanus,
      a single Greek critic who mentions Virgil or Horace. They seem
      ignorant that the Romans had any good writers.]


      42 (return) [ The curious reader may see in Dupin, (Bibliotheque
      Ecclesiastique, tom. xix. p. 1, c. 8,) how much the use of the
      Syriac and Egyptian languages was still preserved.]


      43 (return) [ See Juvenal, Sat. iii. and xv. Ammian. Marcellin.
      xxii. 16.]


      44 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxvii. p. 1275. The first
      instance happened under the reign of Septimius Severus.]


      It is a just though trite observation, that victorious Rome was
      herself subdued by the arts of Greece. Those immortal writers who
      still command the admiration of modern Europe, soon became the
      favorite object of study and imitation in Italy and the western
      provinces. But the elegant amusements of the Romans were not
      suffered to interfere with their sound maxims of policy. Whilst
      they acknowledged the charms of the Greek, they asserted the
      dignity of the Latin tongue, and the exclusive use of the latter
      was inflexibly maintained in the administration of civil as well
      as military government. 45 The two languages exercised at the
      same time their separate jurisdiction throughout the empire: the
      former, as the natural idiom of science; the latter, as the legal
      dialect of public transactions. Those who united letters with
      business were equally conversant with both; and it was almost
      impossible, in any province, to find a Roman subject, of a
      liberal education, who was at once a stranger to the Greek and to
      the Latin language.


      45 (return) [ See Valerius Maximus, l. ii. c. 2, n. 2. The
      emperor Claudius disfranchised an eminent Grecian for not
      understanding Latin. He was probably in some public office.
      Suetonius in Claud. c. 16. * Note: Causes seem to have been
      pleaded, even in the senate, in both languages. Val. Max. _loc.
      cit_. Dion. l. lvii. c. 15.—M]


      It was by such institutions that the nations of the empire
      insensibly melted away into the Roman name and people. But there
      still remained, in the centre of every province and of every
      family, an unhappy condition of men who endured the weight,
      without sharing the benefits, of society. In the free states of
      antiquity, the domestic slaves were exposed to the wanton rigor
      of despotism. The perfect settlement of the Roman empire was
      preceded by ages of violence and rapine. The slaves consisted,
      for the most part, of barbarian captives, 451 taken in thousands
      by the chance of war, purchased at a vile price, 46 accustomed to
      a life of independence, and impatient to break and to revenge
      their fetters. Against such internal enemies, whose desperate
      insurrections had more than once reduced the republic to the
      brink of destruction, 47 the most severe 471 regulations, 48 and
      the most cruel treatment, seemed almost justified by the great
      law of self-preservation. But when the principal nations of
      Europe, Asia, and Africa were united under the laws of one
      sovereign, the source of foreign supplies flowed with much less
      abundance, and the Romans were reduced to the milder but more
      tedious method of propagation. 481 In their numerous families,
      and particularly in their country estates, they encouraged the
      marriage of their slaves. 482 The sentiments of nature, the
      habits of education, and the possession of a dependent species of
      property, contributed to alleviate the hardships of servitude. 49
      The existence of a slave became an object of greater value, and
      though his happiness still depended on the temper and
      circumstances of the master, the humanity of the latter, instead
      of being restrained by fear, was encouraged by the sense of his
      own interest. The progress of manners was accelerated by the
      virtue or policy of the emperors; and by the edicts of Hadrian
      and the Antonines, the protection of the laws was extended to the
      most abject part of mankind. The jurisdiction of life and death
      over the slaves, a power long exercised and often abused, was
      taken out of private hands, and reserved to the magistrates
      alone. The subterraneous prisons were abolished; and, upon a just
      complaint of intolerable treatment, the injured slave obtained
      either his deliverance, or a less cruel master. 50


      451 (return) [ It was this which rendered the wars so sanguinary,
      and the battles so obstinate. The immortal Robertson, in an
      excellent discourse on the state of the world at the period of
      the establishment of Christianity, has traced a picture of the
      melancholy effects of slavery, in which we find all the depth of
      his views and the strength of his mind. I shall oppose
      successively some passages to the reflections of Gibbon. The
      reader will see, not without interest, the truths which Gibbon
      appears to have mistaken or voluntarily neglected, developed by
      one of the best of modern historians. It is important to call
      them to mind here, in order to establish the facts and their
      consequences with accuracy. I shall more than once have occasion
      to employ, for this purpose, the discourse of Robertson.
      “Captives taken in war were, in all probability, the first
      persons subjected to perpetual servitude; and, when the
      necessities or luxury of mankind increased the demand for slaves,
      every new war recruited their number, by reducing the vanquished
      to that wretched condition. Hence proceeded the fierce and
      desperate spirit with which wars were carried on among ancient
      nations. While chains and slavery were the certain lot of the
      conquered, battles were fought, and towns defended with a rage
      and obstinacy which nothing but horror at such a fate could have
      inspired; but, putting an end to the cruel institution of
      slavery, Christianity extended its mild influences to the
      practice of war, and that barbarous art, softened by its humane
      spirit, ceased to be so destructive. Secure, in every event, of
      personal liberty, the resistance of the vanquished became less
      obstinate, and the triumph of the victor less cruel. Thus
      humanity was introduced into the exercise of war, with which it
      appears to be almost incompatible; and it is to the merciful
      maxims of Christianity, much more than to any other cause, that
      we must ascribe the little ferocity and bloodshed which accompany
      modern victories.”—G.]
