
      The geographers of antiquity have frequently hesitated to what
      portion of the globe they should ascribe Egypt. 85 By its
      situation that celebrated kingdom is included within the immense
      peninsula of Africa; but it is accessible only on the side of
      Asia, whose revolutions, in almost every period of history, Egypt
      has humbly obeyed. A Roman præfect was seated on the splendid
      throne of the Ptolemies; and the iron sceptre of the Mamelukes is
      now in the hands of a Turkish pacha. The Nile flows down the
      country, above five hundred miles from the tropic of Cancer to
      the Mediterranean, and marks on either side the extent of
      fertility by the measure of its inundations. Cyrene, situate
      towards the west, and along the sea-coast, was first a Greek
      colony, afterwards a province of Egypt, and is now lost in the
      desert of Barca. 851


      85 (return) [ Ptolemy and Strabo, with the modern geographers,
      fix the Isthmus of Suez as the boundary of Asia and Africa.
      Dionysius, Mela, Pliny, Sallust, Hirtius, and Solinus, have
      preferred for that purpose the western branch of the Nile, or
      even the great Catabathmus, or descent, which last would assign
      to Asia, not only Egypt, but part of Libya.]


      851 (return) [ The French editor has a long and unnecessary note
      on the History of Cyrene. For the present state of that coast and
      country, the volume of Captain Beechey is full of interesting
      details. Egypt, now an independent and improving kingdom,
      appears, under the enterprising rule of Mahommed Ali, likely to
      revenge its former oppression upon the decrepit power of the
      Turkish empire.—M.—This note was written in 1838. The future
      destiny of Egypt is an important problem, only to be solved by
      time. This observation will also apply to the new French colony
      in Algiers.—M. 1845.]


      From Cyrene to the ocean, the coast of Africa extends above
      fifteen hundred miles; yet so closely is it pressed between the
      Mediterranean and the Sahara, or sandy desert, that its breadth
      seldom exceeds fourscore or a hundred miles. The eastern division
      was considered by the Romans as the more peculiar and proper
      province of Africa. Till the arrival of the Phœnician colonies,
      that fertile country was inhabited by the Libyans, the most
      savage of mankind. Under the immediate jurisdiction of Carthage,
      it became the centre of commerce and empire; but the republic of
      Carthage is now degenerated into the feeble and disorderly states
      of Tripoli and Tunis. The military government of Algiers
      oppresses the wide extent of Numidia, as it was once united under
      Massinissa and Jugurtha; but in the time of Augustus, the limits
      of Numidia were contracted; and, at least, two thirds of the
      country acquiesced in the name of Mauritania, with the epithet of
      Cæsariensis. The genuine Mauritania, or country of the Moors,
      which, from the ancient city of Tingi, or Tangier, was
      distinguished by the appellation of Tingitana, is represented by
      the modern kingdom of Fez. Salle, on the Ocean, so infamous at
      present for its piratical depredations, was noticed by the
      Romans, as the extreme object of their power, and almost of their
      geography. A city of their foundation may still be discovered
      near Mequinez, the residence of the barbarian whom we condescend
      to style the Emperor of Morocco; but it does not appear, that his
      more southern dominions, Morocco itself, and Segelmessa, were
      ever comprehended within the Roman province. The western parts of
      Africa are intersected by the branches of Mount Atlas, a name so
      idly celebrated by the fancy of poets; 86 but which is now
      diffused over the immense ocean that rolls between the ancient
      and the new continent. 87


      86 (return) [ The long range, moderate height, and gentle
      declivity of Mount Atlas, (see Shaw’s Travels, p. 5,) are very
      unlike a solitary mountain which rears its head into the clouds,
      and seems to support the heavens. The peak of Teneriff, on the
      contrary, rises a league and a half above the surface of the sea;
      and, as it was frequently visited by the Phœnicians, might engage
      the notice of the Greek poets. See Buffon, Histoire Naturelle,
      tom. i. p. 312. Histoire des Voyages, tom. ii.]


      87 (return) [ M. de Voltaire, tom. xiv. p. 297, unsupported by
      either fact or probability, has generously bestowed the Canary
      Islands on the Roman empire.]


      Having now finished the circuit of the Roman empire, we may
      observe, that Africa is divided from Spain by a narrow strait of
      about twelve miles, through which the Atlantic flows into the
      Mediterranean. The columns of Hercules, so famous among the
      ancients, were two mountains which seemed to have been torn
      asunder by some convulsion of the elements; and at the foot of
      the European mountain, the fortress of Gibraltar is now seated.
      The whole extent of the Mediterranean Sea, its coasts and its
      islands, were comprised within the Roman dominion. Of the larger
      islands, the two Baleares, which derive their name of Majorca and
      Minorca from their respective size, are subject at present, the
      former to Spain, the latter to Great Britain. 871 It is easier to
      deplore the fate, than to describe the actual condition, of
      Corsica. 872 Two Italian sovereigns assume a regal title from
      Sardinia and Sicily. Crete, or Candia, with Cyprus, and most of
      the smaller islands of Greece and Asia, have been subdued by the
      Turkish arms, whilst the little rock of Malta defies their power,
      and has emerged, under the government of its military Order, into
      fame and opulence. 873


      871 (return) [ Minorca was lost to Great Britain in 1782. Ann.
      Register for that year.—M.]


      872 (return) [ The gallant struggles of the Corsicans for their
      independence, under Paoli, were brought to a close in the year
      1769. This volume was published in 1776. See Botta, Storia
      d’Italia, vol. xiv.—M.]


      873 (return) [ Malta, it need scarcely be said, is now in the
      possession of the English. We have not, however, thought it
      necessary to notice every change in the political state of the
      world, since the time of Gibbon.—M]


      This long enumeration of provinces, whose broken fragments have
      formed so many powerful kingdoms, might almost induce us to
      forgive the vanity or ignorance of the ancients. Dazzled with the
      extensive sway, the irresistible strength, and the real or
      affected moderation of the emperors, they permitted themselves to
      despise, and sometimes to forget, the outlying countries which
      had been left in the enjoyment of a barbarous independence; and
      they gradually usurped the license of confounding the Roman
      monarchy with the globe of the earth. 88 But the temper, as well
      as knowledge, of a modern historian, require a more sober and
      accurate language. He may impress a juster image of the greatness
      of Rome, by observing that the empire was above two thousand
      miles in breadth, from the wall of Antoninus and the northern
      limits of Dacia, to Mount Atlas and the tropic of Cancer; that it
      extended in length more than three thousand miles from the
      Western Ocean to the Euphrates; that it was situated in the
      finest part of the Temperate Zone, between the twenty-fourth and
      fifty-sixth degrees of northern latitude; and that it was
      supposed to contain above sixteen hundred thousand square miles,
      for the most part of fertile and well-cultivated land. 89

