

      6 (return) [ Cæsar himself conceals that ignoble motive; but it
      is mentioned by Suetonius, c. 47. The British pearls proved,
      however, of little value, on account of their dark and livid
      color. Tacitus observes, with reason, (in Agricola, c. 12,) that
      it was an inherent defect. “Ego facilius crediderim, naturam
      margaritis deesse quam nobis avaritiam.”]


      7 (return) [ Claudius, Nero, and Domitian. A hope is expressed by
      Pomponius Mela, l. iii. c. 6, (he wrote under Claudius,) that, by
      the success of the Roman arms, the island and its savage
      inhabitants would soon be better known. It is amusing enough to
      peruse such passages in the midst of London.]


      8 (return) [ See the admirable abridgment given by Tacitus, in
      the life of Agricola, and copiously, though perhaps not
      completely, illustrated by our own antiquarians, Camden and
      Horsley.]


      9 (return) [ The Irish writers, jealous of their national honor,
      are extremely provoked on this occasion, both with Tacitus and
      with Agricola.]


      But the superior merit of Agricola soon occasioned his removal
      from the government of Britain; and forever disappointed this
      rational, though extensive scheme of conquest. Before his
      departure, the prudent general had provided for security as well
      as for dominion. He had observed, that the island is almost
      divided into two unequal parts by the opposite gulfs, or, as they
      are now called, the Friths of Scotland. Across the narrow
      interval of about forty miles, he had drawn a line of military
      stations, which was afterwards fortified, in the reign of
      Antoninus Pius, by a turf rampart, erected on foundations of
      stone. 10 This wall of Antoninus, at a small distance beyond the
      modern cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow, was fixed as the limit of
      the Roman province. The native Caledonians preserved, in the
      northern extremity of the island, their wild independence, for
      which they were not less indebted to their poverty than to their
      valor. Their incursions were frequently repelled and chastised;
      but their country was never subdued. 11 The masters of the
      fairest and most wealthy climates of the globe turned with
      contempt from gloomy hills, assailed by the winter tempest, from
      lakes concealed in a blue mist, and from cold and lonely heaths,
      over which the deer of the forest were chased by a troop of naked
      barbarians. 12


      10 (return) [ See Horsley’s Britannia Romana, l. i. c. 10. Note:
      Agricola fortified the line from Dumbarton to Edinburgh,
      consequently within Scotland. The emperor Hadrian, during his
      residence in Britain, about the year 121, caused a rampart of
      earth to be raised between Newcastle and Carlisle. Antoninus
      Pius, having gained new victories over the Caledonians, by the
      ability of his general, Lollius, Urbicus, caused a new rampart of
      earth to be constructed between Edinburgh and Dumbarton. Lastly,
      Septimius Severus caused a wall of stone to be built parallel to
      the rampart of Hadrian, and on the same locality. See John
      Warburton’s Vallum Romanum, or the History and Antiquities of the
      Roman Wall. London, 1754, 4to.—W. See likewise a good note on the
      Roman wall in Lingard’s History of England, vol. i. p. 40, 4to
      edit—M.]


      11 (return) [ The poet Buchanan celebrates with elegance and
      spirit (see his Sylvæ, v.) the unviolated independence of his
      native country. But, if the single testimony of Richard of
      Cirencester was sufficient to create a Roman province of
      Vespasiana to the north of the wall, that independence would be
      reduced within very narrow limits.]


      12 (return) [ See Appian (in Proœm.) and the uniform imagery of
      Ossian’s Poems, which, according to every hypothesis, were
      composed by a native Caledonian.]


      Such was the state of the Roman frontiers, and such the maxims of
      Imperial policy, from the death of Augustus to the accession of
      Trajan. That virtuous and active prince had received the
      education of a soldier, and possessed the talents of a general.
      13 The peaceful system of his predecessors was interrupted by
      scenes of war and conquest; and the legions, after a long
      interval, beheld a military emperor at their head. The first
      exploits of Trajan were against the Dacians, the most warlike of
      men, who dwelt beyond the Danube, and who, during the reign of
      Domitian, had insulted, with impunity, the Majesty of Rome. 14 To
      the strength and fierceness of barbarians they added a contempt
      for life, which was derived from a warm persuasion of the
      immortality and transmigration of the soul. 15 Decebalus, the
      Dacian king, approved himself a rival not unworthy of Trajan; nor
      did he despair of his own and the public fortune, till, by the
      confession of his enemies, he had exhausted every resource both
      of valor and policy. 16 This memorable war, with a very short
      suspension of hostilities, lasted five years; and as the emperor
      could exert, without control, the whole force of the state, it
      was terminated by an absolute submission of the barbarians. 17
      The new province of Dacia, which formed a second exception to the
      precept of Augustus, was about thirteen hundred miles in
      circumference. Its natural boundaries were the Niester, the Teyss
      or Tibiscus, the Lower Danube, and the Euxine Sea. The vestiges
      of a military road may still be traced from the banks of the
      Danube to the neighborhood of Bender, a place famous in modern
      history, and the actual frontier of the Turkish and Russian
      empires. 18


      13 (return) [ See Pliny’s Panegyric, which seems founded on
      facts.]


      14 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxvii.]


      15 (return) [ Herodotus, l. iv. c. 94. Julian in the Cæsars, with
      Spanheims observations.]


      16 (return) [ Plin. Epist. viii. 9.]


      17 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxviii. p. 1123, 1131. Julian in
      Cæsaribus Eutropius, viii. 2, 6. Aurelius Victor in Epitome.]


      18 (return) [ See a Memoir of M. d’Anville, on the Province of
      Dacia, in the Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxviii. p.
      444—468.]


      Trajan was ambitious of fame; and as long as mankind shall
      continue to bestow more liberal applause on their destroyers than
      on their benefactors, the thirst of military glory will ever be
      the vice of the most exalted characters. The praises of
      Alexander, transmitted by a succession of poets and historians,
      had kindled a dangerous emulation in the mind of Trajan. Like
      him, the Roman emperor undertook an expedition against the
      nations of the East; but he lamented with a sigh, that his
      advanced age scarcely left him any hopes of equalling the renown
      of the son of Philip. 19 Yet the success of Trajan, however
      transient, was rapid and specious. The degenerate Parthians,
      broken by intestine discord, fled before his arms. He descended
      the River Tigris in triumph, from the mountains of Armenia to the
      Persian Gulf. He enjoyed the honor of being the first, as he was
      the last, of the Roman generals, who ever navigated that remote
      sea. His fleets ravaged the coast of Arabia; and Trajan vainly
      flattered himself that he was approaching towards the confines of
      India. 20 Every day the astonished senate received the
      intelligence of new names and new nations, that acknowledged his
      sway. They were informed that the kings of Bosphorus, Colchos,
      Iberia, Albania, Osrhoene, and even the Parthian monarch himself,
      had accepted their diadems from the hands of the emperor; that
      the independent tribes of the Median and Carduchian hills had
      implored his protection; and that the rich countries of Armenia,
      Mesopotamia, and Assyria, were reduced into the state of
      provinces. 21 But the death of Trajan soon clouded the splendid
      prospect; and it was justly to be dreaded, that so many distant
      nations would throw off the unaccustomed yoke, when they were no
      longer restrained by the powerful hand which had imposed it.


      19 (return) [ Trajan’s sentiments are represented in a very just
      and lively manner in the Cæsars of Julian.]


      20 (return) [ Eutropius and Sextus Rufus have endeavored to
      perpetuate the illusion. See a very sensible dissertation of M.
      Freret in the Académie des Inscriptions, tom. xxi. p. 55.]


      21 (return) [Dion Cassius, l. lxviii.; and the Abbreviators.]


      Chapter I: The Extent Of The Empire In The Age Of The
      Antonines.—Part II.


      It was an ancient tradition, that when the Capitol was founded by
      one of the Roman kings, the god Terminus (who presided over
      boundaries, and was represented, according to the fashion of that
      age, by a large stone) alone, among all the inferior deities,
      refused to yield his place to Jupiter himself. A favorable
      inference was drawn from his obstinacy, which was interpreted by
      the augurs as a sure presage that the boundaries of the Roman
      power would never recede. 22 During many ages, the prediction, as
      it is usual, contributed to its own accomplishment. But though
      Terminus had resisted the Majesty of Jupiter, he submitted to the
      authority of the emperor Hadrian. 23 The resignation of all the
      eastern conquests of Trajan was the first measure of his reign.
      He restored to the Parthians the election of an independent
      sovereign; withdrew the Roman garrisons from the provinces of
      Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria; and, in compliance with the
      precept of Augustus, once more established the Euphrates as the
      frontier of the empire. 24 Censure, which arraigns the public
      actions and the private motives of princes, has ascribed to envy,
      a conduct which might be attributed to the prudence and
      moderation of Hadrian. The various character of that emperor,
      capable, by turns, of the meanest and the most generous
      sentiments, may afford some color to the suspicion. It was,
      however, scarcely in his power to place the superiority of his
      predecessor in a more conspicuous light, than by thus confessing
      himself unequal to the task of defending the conquests of Trajan.


      22 (return) [ Ovid. Fast. l. ii. ver. 667. See Livy, and
      Dionysius of Halicarnassus, under the reign of Tarquin.]


      23 (return) [ St. Augustin is highly delighted with the proof of
      the weakness of Terminus, and the vanity of the Augurs. See De
      Civitate Dei, iv. 29. * Note: The turn of Gibbon’s sentence is
      Augustin’s: “Plus Hadrianum regem hominum, quam regem Deorum
      timuisse videatur.”—M]


      24 (return) [ See the Augustan History, p. 5, Jerome’s Chronicle,
      and all the Epitomizers. It is somewhat surprising, that this
      memorable event should be omitted by Dion, or rather by
      Xiphilin.]


      The martial and ambitious spirit of Trajan formed a very singular
      contrast with the moderation of his successor. The restless
      activity of Hadrian was not less remarkable when compared with
      the gentle repose of Antoninus Pius. The life of the former was
      almost a perpetual journey; and as he possessed the various
      talents of the soldier, the statesman, and the scholar, he
      gratified his curiosity in the discharge of his duty.


      Careless of the difference of seasons and of climates, he marched
      on foot, and bare-headed, over the snows of Caledonia, and the
      sultry plains of the Upper Egypt; nor was there a province of the
      empire which, in the course of his reign, was not honored with
      the presence of the monarch. 25 But the tranquil life of
      Antoninus Pius was spent in the bosom of Italy, and, during the
      twenty-three years that he directed the public administration,
      the longest journeys of that amiable prince extended no farther
      than from his palace in Rome to the retirement of his Lanuvian
      villa. 26


      25 (return) [ Dion, l. lxix. p. 1158. Hist. August. p. 5, 8. If
      all our historians were lost, medals, inscriptions, and other
      monuments, would be sufficient to record the travels of Hadrian.
      Note: The journeys of Hadrian are traced in a note on Solvet’s
      translation of Hegewisch, Essai sur l’Epoque de Histoire Romaine
      la plus heureuse pour Genre Humain Paris, 1834, p. 123.—M.]


      26 (return) [ See the Augustan History and the Epitomes.]


      Notwithstanding this difference in their personal conduct, the
      general system of Augustus was equally adopted and uniformly
      pursued by Hadrian and by the two Antonines. They persisted in
      the design of maintaining the dignity of the empire, without
      attempting to enlarge its limits. By every honorable expedient
      they invited the friendship of the barbarians; and endeavored to
      convince mankind that the Roman power, raised above the
      temptation of conquest, was actuated only by the love of order
      and justice. During a long period of forty-three years, their
      virtuous labors were crowned with success; and if we except a few
      slight hostilities, that served to exercise the legions of the
      frontier, the reigns of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius offer the fair
      prospect of universal peace. 27 The Roman name was revered among
      the most remote nations of the earth. The fiercest barbarians
      frequently submitted their differences to the arbitration of the
      emperor; and we are informed by a contemporary historian that he
      had seen ambassadors who were refused the honor which they came
      to solicit of being admitted into the rank of subjects. 28


      27 (return) [ We must, however, remember, that in the time of
      Hadrian, a rebellion of the Jews raged with religious fury,
      though only in a single province. Pausanias (l. viii. c. 43)
      mentions two necessary and successful wars, conducted by the
      generals of Pius: 1st. Against the wandering Moors, who were
      driven into the solitudes of Atlas. 2d. Against the Brigantes of
      Britain, who had invaded the Roman province. Both these wars
      (with several other hostilities) are mentioned in the Augustan
      History, p. 19.]


      28 (return) [ Appian of Alexandria, in the preface to his History
      of the Roman Wars.]


      The terror of the Roman arms added weight and dignity to the
      moderation of the emperors. They preserved peace by a constant
      preparation for war; and while justice regulated their conduct,
      they announced to the nations on their confines, that they were
      as little disposed to endure, as to offer an injury. The military
      strength, which it had been sufficient for Hadrian and the elder
      Antoninus to display, was exerted against the Parthians and the
      Germans by the emperor Marcus. The hostilities of the barbarians
      provoked the resentment of that philosophic monarch, and, in the
      prosecution of a just defence, Marcus and his generals obtained
      many signal victories, both on the Euphrates and on the Danube.
      29 The military establishment of the Roman empire, which thus
      assured either its tranquillity or success, will now become the
      proper and important object of our attention.


      29 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxi. Hist. August. in Marco. The Parthian
      victories gave birth to a crowd of contemptible historians, whose
      memory has been rescued from oblivion and exposed to ridicule, in
      a very lively piece of criticism of Lucian.]


      In the purer ages of the commonwealth, the use of arms was
      reserved for those ranks of citizens who had a country to love, a
      property to defend, and some share in enacting those laws, which
      it was their interest as well as duty to maintain. But in
      proportion as the public freedom was lost in extent of conquest,
      war was gradually improved into an art, and degraded into a
      trade. 30 The legions themselves, even at the time when they were
      recruited in the most distant provinces, were supposed to consist
      of Roman citizens. That distinction was generally considered,
      either as a legal qualification or as a proper recompense for the
      soldier; but a more serious regard was paid to the essential
      merit of age, strength, and military stature. 31 In all levies, a
      just preference was given to the climates of the North over those
      of the South: the race of men born to the exercise of arms was
      sought for in the country rather than in cities; and it was very
      reasonably presumed, that the hardy occupations of smiths,
      carpenters, and huntsmen, would supply more vigor and resolution
      than the sedentary trades which are employed in the service of
      luxury. 32 After every qualification of property had been laid
      aside, the armies of the Roman emperors were still commanded, for
      the most part, by officers of liberal birth and education; but
      the common soldiers, like the mercenary troops of modern Europe,
      were drawn from the meanest, and very frequently from the most
      profligate, of mankind.


      30 (return) [ The poorest rank of soldiers possessed above forty
      pounds sterling, (Dionys. Halicarn. iv. 17,) a very high
      qualification at a time when money was so scarce, that an ounce
      of silver was equivalent to seventy pounds weight of brass. The
      populace, excluded by the ancient constitution, were
      indiscriminately admitted by Marius. See Sallust. de Bell.
      Jugurth. c. 91. * Note: On the uncertainty of all these
      estimates, and the difficulty of fixing the relative value of
      brass and silver, compare Niebuhr, vol. i. p. 473, &c. Eng.
      trans. p. 452. According to Niebuhr, the relative disproportion
      in value, between the two metals, arose, in a great degree from
      the abundance of brass or copper.—M. Compare also Dureau ‘de la
      Malle Economie Politique des Romains especially L. l. c. ix.—M.
      1845.]


      31 (return) [ Cæsar formed his legion Alauda of Gauls and
      strangers; but it was during the license of civil war; and after
      the victory, he gave them the freedom of the city for their
      reward.]


      32 (return) [ See Vegetius, de Re Militari, l. i. c. 2—7.]


      That public virtue, which among the ancients was denominated
      patriotism, is derived from a strong sense of our own interest in
      the preservation and prosperity of the free government of which
      we are members. Such a sentiment, which had rendered the legions
      of the republic almost invincible, could make but a very feeble
      impression on the mercenary servants of a despotic prince; and it
      became necessary to supply that defect by other motives, of a
      different, but not less forcible nature—honor and religion. The
      peasant, or mechanic, imbibed the useful prejudice that he was
      advanced to the more dignified profession of arms, in which his
      rank and reputation would depend on his own valor; and that,
      although the prowess of a private soldier must often escape the
      notice of fame, his own behavior might sometimes confer glory or
      disgrace on the company, the legion, or even the army, to whose
      honors he was associated. On his first entrance into the service,
      an oath was administered to him with every circumstance of
      solemnity. He promised never to desert his standard, to submit
      his own will to the commands of his leaders, and to sacrifice his
      life for the safety of the emperor and the empire. 33 The
      attachment of the Roman troops to their standards was inspired by
      the united influence of religion and of honor. The golden eagle,
      which glittered in the front of the legion, was the object of
      their fondest devotion; nor was it esteemed less impious than it
      was ignominious, to abandon that sacred ensign in the hour of
      danger. 34 These motives, which derived their strength from the
      imagination, were enforced by fears and hopes of a more
      substantial kind. Regular pay, occasional donatives, and a stated
      recompense, after the appointed time of service, alleviated the
      hardships of the military life, 35 whilst, on the other hand, it
      was impossible for cowardice or disobedience to escape the
      severest punishment. The centurions were authorized to chastise
      with blows, the generals had a right to punish with death; and it
      was an inflexible maxim of Roman discipline, that a good soldier
      should dread his officers far more than the enemy. From such
      laudable arts did the valor of the Imperial troops receive a
      degree of firmness and docility unattainable by the impetuous and
      irregular passions of barbarians.


      33 (return) [ The oath of service and fidelity to the emperor was
      annually renewed by the troops on the first of January.]


      34 (return) [ Tacitus calls the Roman eagles, Bellorum Deos. They
      were placed in a chapel in the camp, and with the other deities
      received the religious worship of the troops. * Note: See also
      Dio. Cass. xl. c. 18. —M.]


      35 (return) [ See Gronovius de Pecunia vetere, l. iii. p. 120,
      &c. The emperor Domitian raised the annual stipend of the
      legionaries to twelve pieces of gold, which, in his time, was
      equivalent to about ten of our guineas. This pay, somewhat higher
      than our own, had been, and was afterwards, gradually increased,
      according to the progress of wealth and military government.
      After twenty years’ service, the veteran received three thousand
      denarii, (about one hundred pounds sterling,) or a proportionable
      allowance of land. The pay and advantages of the guards were, in
      general, about double those of the legions.]


      And yet so sensible were the Romans of the imperfection of valor
      without skill and practice, that, in their language, the name of
      an army was borrowed from the word which signified exercise. 36
      Military exercises were the important and unremitted object of
      their discipline. The recruits and young soldiers were constantly
      trained, both in the morning and in the evening, nor was age or
      knowledge allowed to excuse the veterans from the daily
      repetition of what they had completely learnt. Large sheds were
      erected in the winter-quarters of the troops, that their useful
      labors might not receive any interruption from the most
      tempestuous weather; and it was carefully observed, that the arms
      destined to this imitation of war, should be of double the weight
      which was required in real action. 37 It is not the purpose of
      this work to enter into any minute description of the Roman
      exercises. We shall only remark, that they comprehended whatever
      could add strength to the body, activity to the limbs, or grace
      to the motions. The soldiers were diligently instructed to march,
      to run, to leap, to swim, to carry heavy burdens, to handle every
      species of arms that was used either for offence or for defence,
      either in distant engagement or in a closer onset; to form a
      variety of evolutions; and to move to the sound of flutes in the
      Pyrrhic or martial dance. 38 In the midst of peace, the Roman
      troops familiarized themselves with the practice of war; and it
      is prettily remarked by an ancient historian who had fought
      against them, that the effusion of blood was the only
      circumstance which distinguished a field of battle from a field
      of exercise. 39 It was the policy of the ablest generals, and
      even of the emperors themselves, to encourage these military
      studies by their presence and example; and we are informed that
      Hadrian, as well as Trajan, frequently condescended to instruct
      the unexperienced soldiers, to reward the diligent, and sometimes
      to dispute with them the prize of superior strength or dexterity.
      40 Under the reigns of those princes, the science of tactics was
      cultivated with success; and as long as the empire retained any
      vigor, their military instructions were respected as the most
      perfect model of Roman discipline.


      36 (return) [ _Exercitus ab exercitando_, Varro de Lingua Latina,
      l. iv. Cicero in Tusculan. l. ii. 37. 15. There is room for a
      very interesting work, which should lay open the connection
      between the languages and manners of nations. * Note I am not
      aware of the existence, at present, of such a work; but the
      profound observations of the late William von Humboldt, in the
      introduction to his posthumously published Essay on the Language
      of the Island of Java, (uber die Kawi-sprache, Berlin, 1836,) may
      cause regret that this task was not completed by that
      accomplished and universal scholar.—M.]


      37 (return) [ Vegatius, l. ii. and the rest of his first book.]


      38 (return) [ The Pyrrhic dance is extremely well illustrated by
      M. le Beau, in the Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxxv. p. 262,
      &c. That learned academician, in a series of memoirs, has
      collected all the passages of the ancients that relate to the
      Roman legion.]


      39 (return) [ Joseph. de Bell. Judaico, l. iii. c. 5. We are
      indebted to this Jew for some very curious details of Roman
      discipline.]


      40 (return) [ Plin. Panegyr. c. 13. Life of Hadrian, in the
      Augustan History.]


      Nine centuries of war had gradually introduced into the service
      many alterations and improvements. The legions, as they are
      described by Polybius, 41 in the time of the Punic wars, differed
      very materially from those which achieved the victories of Cæsar,
      or defended the monarchy of Hadrian and the Antonines. The
      constitution of the Imperial legion may be described in a few
      words. 42 The heavy-armed infantry, which composed its principal
      strength, 43 was divided into ten cohorts, and fifty-five
      companies, under the orders of a correspondent number of tribunes
      and centurions. The first cohort, which always claimed the post
      of honor and the custody of the eagle, was formed of eleven
      hundred and five soldiers, the most approved for valor and
      fidelity. The remaining nine cohorts consisted each of five
      hundred and fifty-five; and the whole body of legionary infantry
      amounted to six thousand one hundred men. Their arms were
      uniform, and admirably adapted to the nature of their service: an
      open helmet, with a lofty crest; a breastplate, or coat of mail;
      greaves on their legs, and an ample buckler on their left arm.
      The buckler was of an oblong and concave figure, four feet in
      length, and two and a half in breadth, framed of a light wood,
      covered with a bull’s hide, and strongly guarded with plates of
      brass. Besides a lighter spear, the legionary soldier grasped in
      his right hand the formidable _pilum_, a ponderous javelin, whose
      utmost length was about six feet, and which was terminated by a
      massy triangular point of steel of eighteen inches. 44 This
      instrument was indeed much inferior to our modern fire-arms;
      since it was exhausted by a single discharge, at the distance of
      only ten or twelve paces. Yet when it was launched by a firm and
      skilful hand, there was not any cavalry that durst venture within
      its reach, nor any shield or corselet that could sustain the
      impetuosity of its weight. As soon as the Roman had darted his
      _pilum_, he drew his sword, and rushed forwards to close with the
      enemy. His sword was a short well-tempered Spanish blade, that
      carried a double edge, and was alike suited to the purpose of
      striking or of pushing; but the soldier was always instructed to
      prefer the latter use of his weapon, as his own body remained
      less exposed, whilst he inflicted a more dangerous wound on his
      adversary. 45 The legion was usually drawn up eight deep; and the
      regular distance of three feet was left between the files as well
      as ranks. 46 A body of troops, habituated to preserve this open
      order, in a long front and a rapid charge, found themselves
      prepared to execute every disposition which the circumstances of
      war, or the skill of their leader, might suggest. The soldier
      possessed a free space for his arms and motions, and sufficient
      intervals were allowed, through which seasonable reinforcements
      might be introduced to the relief of the exhausted combatants. 47
      The tactics of the Greeks and Macedonians were formed on very
      different principles. The strength of the phalanx depended on
      sixteen ranks of long pikes, wedged together in the closest
      array. 48 But it was soon discovered by reflection, as well as by
      the event, that the strength of the phalanx was unable to contend
      with the activity of the legion. 49


      41 (return) [ See an admirable digression on the Roman
      discipline, in the sixth book of his History.]


      42 (return) [ Vegetius de Re Militari, l. ii. c. 4, &c.
      Considerable part of his very perplexed abridgment was taken from
      the regulations of Trajan and Hadrian; and the legion, as he
      describes it, cannot suit any other age of the Roman empire.]


      43 (return) [Vegetius de Re Militari, l. ii. c. 1. In the purer
      age of Cæsar and Cicero, the word miles was almost confined to
      the infantry. Under the lower empire, and the times of chivalry,
      it was appropriated almost as exclusively to the men at arms, who
      fought on horseback.]


      44 (return) [ In the time of Polybius and Dionysius of
      Halicarnassus, (l. v. c. 45,) the steel point of the pilum seems
      to have been much longer. In the time of Vegetius, it was reduced
      to a foot, or even nine inches. I have chosen a medium.]


      45 (return) [ For the legionary arms, see Lipsius de Militia
      Romana, l. iii. c. 2—7.]


      46 (return) [ See the beautiful comparison of Virgil, Georgic ii.
      v. 279.]


      47 (return) [ M. Guichard, Memoires Militaires, tom. i. c. 4, and
      Nouveaux Memoires, tom. i. p. 293—311, has treated the subject
      like a scholar and an officer.]


      48 (return) [ See Arrian’s Tactics. With the true partiality of a
      Greek, Arrian rather chose to describe the phalanx, of which he
      had read, than the legions which he had commanded.]


      49 (return) [ Polyb. l. xvii. (xviii. 9.)]


      The cavalry, without which the force of the legion would have
      remained imperfect, was divided into ten troops or squadrons; the
      first, as the companion of the first cohort, consisted of a
      hundred and thirty-two men; whilst each of the other nine
      amounted only to sixty-six. The entire establishment formed a
      regiment, if we may use the modern expression, of seven hundred
      and twenty-six horse, naturally connected with its respective
      legion, but occasionally separated to act in the line, and to
      compose a part of the wings of the army. 50 The cavalry of the
      emperors was no longer composed, like that of the ancient
      republic, of the noblest youths of Rome and Italy, who, by
      performing their military service on horseback, prepared
      themselves for the offices of senator and consul; and solicited,
      by deeds of valor, the future suffrages of their countrymen. 51
      Since the alteration of manners and government, the most wealthy
      of the equestrian order were engaged in the administration of
      justice, and of the revenue; 52 and whenever they embraced the
      profession of arms, they were immediately intrusted with a troop
      of horse, or a cohort of foot. 53 Trajan and Hadrian formed their
      cavalry from the same provinces, and the same class of their
      subjects, which recruited the ranks of the legion. The horses
      were bred, for the most part, in Spain or Cappadocia. The Roman
      troopers despised the complete armor with which the cavalry of
      the East was encumbered. _Their_ more useful arms consisted in a
      helmet, an oblong shield, light boots, and a coat of mail. A
      javelin, and a long broad sword, were their principal weapons of
      offence. The use of lances and of iron maces they seem to have
      borrowed from the barbarians. 54


      50 (return) [ Veget. de Re Militari, l. ii. c. 6. His positive
      testimony, which might be supported by circumstantial evidence,
      ought surely to silence those critics who refuse the Imperial
      legion its proper body of cavalry. Note: See also Joseph. B. J.
      iii. vi. 2.—M.]


      51 (return) [ See Livy almost throughout, particularly xlii. 61.]


      52 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. xxxiii. 2. The true sense of
      that very curious passage was first discovered and illustrated by
      M. de Beaufort, Republique Romaine, l. ii. c. 2.]


      53 (return) [ As in the instance of Horace and Agricola. This
      appears to have been a defect in the Roman discipline; which
      Hadrian endeavored to remedy by ascertaining the legal age of a
      tribune. * Note: These details are not altogether accurate.
      Although, in the latter days of the republic, and under the first
      emperors, the young Roman nobles obtained the command of a
      squadron or a cohort with greater facility than in the former
      times, they never obtained it without passing through a tolerably
      long military service. Usually they served first in the prætorian
      cohort, which was intrusted with the guard of the general: they
      were received into the companionship (contubernium) of some
      superior officer, and were there formed for duty. Thus Julius
      Cæsar, though sprung from a great family, served first as
      contubernalis under the prætor, M. Thermus, and later under
      Servilius the Isaurian. (Suet. Jul. 2, 5. Plut. in Par. p. 516.
      Ed. Froben.) The example of Horace, which Gibbon adduces to prove
      that young knights were made tribunes immediately on entering the
      service, proves nothing. In the first place, Horace was not a
      knight; he was the son of a freedman of Venusia, in Apulia, who
      exercised the humble office of coactor exauctionum, (collector of
      payments at auctions.) (Sat. i. vi. 45, or 86.) Moreover, when
      the poet was made tribune, Brutus, whose army was nearly entirely
      composed of Orientals, gave this title to all the Romans of
      consideration who joined him. The emperors were still less
      difficult in their choice; the number of tribunes was augmented;
      the title and honors were conferred on persons whom they wished
      to attack to the court. Augustus conferred on the sons of
      senators, sometimes the tribunate, sometimes the command of a
      squadron. Claudius gave to the knights who entered into the
      service, first the command of a cohort of auxiliaries, later that
      of a squadron, and at length, for the first time, the tribunate.
      (Suet in Claud. with the notes of Ernesti.) The abuses that arose
      caused by the edict of Hadrian, which fixed the age at which that
      honor could be attained. (Spart. in Had. &c.) This edict was
      subsequently obeyed; for the emperor Valerian, in a letter
      addressed to Mulvius Gallinnus, prætorian præfect, excuses
      himself for having violated it in favor of the young Probus
      afterwards emperor, on whom he had conferred the tribunate at an
      earlier age on account of his rare talents. (Vopisc. in Prob.
      iv.)—W. and G. Agricola, though already invested with the title
      of tribune, was contubernalis in Britain with Suetonius Paulinus.
      Tac. Agr. v.—M.]


      54 (return) [ See Arrian’s Tactics.]


      The safety and honor of the empire was principally intrusted to
      the legions, but the policy of Rome condescended to adopt every
      useful instrument of war. Considerable levies were regularly made
      among the provincials, who had not yet deserved the honorable
      distinction of Romans. Many dependent princes and communities,
      dispersed round the frontiers, were permitted, for a while, to
      hold their freedom and security by the tenure of military
      service. 55 Even select troops of hostile barbarians were
      frequently compelled or persuaded to consume their dangerous
      valor in remote climates, and for the benefit of the state. 56
      All these were included under the general name of auxiliaries;
      and howsoever they might vary according to the difference of
      times and circumstances, their numbers were seldom much inferior
      to those of the legions themselves. 57 Among the auxiliaries, the
      bravest and most faithful bands were placed under the command of
      præfects and centurions, and severely trained in the arts of
      Roman discipline; but the far greater part retained those arms,
      to which the nature of their country, or their early habits of
      life, more peculiarly adapted them. By this institution, each
      legion, to whom a certain proportion of auxiliaries was allotted,
      contained within itself every species of lighter troops, and of
      missile weapons; and was capable of encountering every nation,
      with the advantages of its respective arms and discipline. 58 Nor
      was the legion destitute of what, in modern language, would be
      styled a train of artillery. It consisted in ten military engines
      of the largest, and fifty-five of a smaller size; but all of
      which, either in an oblique or horizontal manner, discharged
      stones and darts with irresistible violence. 59


      55 (return) [ Such, in particular, was the state of the
      Batavians. Tacit. Germania, c. 29.]


      56 (return) [ Marcus Antoninus obliged the vanquished Quadi and
      Marcomanni to supply him with a large body of troops, which he
      immediately sent into Britain. Dion Cassius, l. lxxi. (c. 16.)]


      57 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. iv. 5. Those who fix a regular
      proportion of as many foot, and twice as many horse, confound the
      auxiliaries of the emperors with the Italian allies of the
      republic.]


      58 (return) [ Vegetius, ii. 2. Arrian, in his order of march and
      battle against the Alani.]


      59 (return) [ The subject of the ancient machines is treated with
      great knowledge and ingenuity by the Chevalier Folard, (Polybe,
      tom. ii. p. 233-290.) He prefers them in many respects to our
      modern cannon and mortars. We may observe, that the use of them
      in the field gradually became more prevalent, in proportion as
      personal valor and military skill declined with the Roman empire.
      When men were no longer found, their place was supplied by
      machines. See Vegetius, ii. 25. Arrian.]


      Chapter I: The Extent Of The Empire In The Age Of The
      Antonines.—Part III.


      The camp of a Roman legion presented the appearance of a
      fortified city. 60 As soon as the space was marked out, the
      pioneers carefully levelled the ground, and removed every
      impediment that might interrupt its perfect regularity. Its form
      was an exact quadrangle; and we may calculate, that a square of
      about seven hundred yards was sufficient for the encampment of
      twenty thousand Romans; though a similar number of our own troops
      would expose to the enemy a front of more than treble that
      extent. In the midst of the camp, the prætorium, or general’s
      quarters, rose above the others; the cavalry, the infantry, and
      the auxiliaries occupied their respective stations; the streets
      were broad and perfectly straight, and a vacant space of two
      hundred feet was left on all sides between the tents and the
      rampart. The rampart itself was usually twelve feet high, armed
      with a line of strong and intricate palisades, and defended by a
      ditch of twelve feet in depth as well as in breadth. This
      important labor was performed by the hands of the legionaries
      themselves; to whom the use of the spade and the pickaxe was no
      less familiar than that of the sword or _pilum_. Active valor may
      often be the present of nature; but such patient diligence can be
      the fruit only of habit and discipline. 61


      60 (return) [ Vegetius finishes his second book, and the
      description of the legion, with the following emphatic
      words:—“Universa quæ in quoque belli genere necessaria esse
      creduntur, secum legio debet ubique portare, ut in quovis loco
      fixerit castra, armatam faciat civitatem.”]


      61 (return) [ For the Roman Castrametation, see Polybius, l. vi.
      with Lipsius de Militia Romana, Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. iii. c.
      5. Vegetius, i. 21—25, iii. 9, and Memoires de Guichard, tom. i.
      c. 1.]


      Whenever the trumpet gave the signal of departure, the camp was
      almost instantly broke up, and the troops fell into their ranks
      without delay or confusion. Besides their arms, which the
      legionaries scarcely considered as an encumbrance, they were
      laden with their kitchen furniture, the instruments of
      fortification, and the provision of many days. 62 Under this
      weight, which would oppress the delicacy of a modern soldier,
      they were trained by a regular step to advance, in about six
      hours, near twenty miles. 63 On the appearance of an enemy, they
      threw aside their baggage, and by easy and rapid evolutions
      converted the column of march into an order of battle. 64 The
      slingers and archers skirmished in the front; the auxiliaries
      formed the first line, and were seconded or sustained by the
      strength of the legions; the cavalry covered the flanks, and the
      military engines were placed in the rear.


      62 (return) [ Cicero in Tusculan. ii. 37, [15.]—Joseph. de Bell.
      Jud. l. iii. 5, Frontinus, iv. 1.]


      63 (return) [ Vegetius, i. 9. See Memoires de l’Academie des
      Inscriptions, tom. xxv. p. 187.]


      64 (return) [ See those evolutions admirably well explained by M.
      Guichard Nouveaux Memoires, tom. i. p. 141—234.]


      Such were the arts of war, by which the Roman emperors defended
      their extensive conquests, and preserved a military spirit, at a
      time when every other virtue was oppressed by luxury and
      despotism. If, in the consideration of their armies, we pass from
      their discipline to their numbers, we shall not find it easy to
      define them with any tolerable accuracy. We may compute, however,
      that the legion, which was itself a body of six thousand eight
      hundred and thirty-one Romans, might, with its attendant
      auxiliaries, amount to about twelve thousand five hundred men.
      The peace establishment of Hadrian and his successors was
      composed of no less than thirty of these formidable brigades; and
      most probably formed a standing force of three hundred and
      seventy-five thousand men. Instead of being confined within the
      walls of fortified cities, which the Romans considered as the
      refuge of weakness or pusillanimity, the legions were encamped on
      the banks of the great rivers, and along the frontiers of the
      barbarians. As their stations, for the most part, remained fixed
      and permanent, we may venture to describe the distribution of the
      troops. Three legions were sufficient for Britain. The principal
      strength lay upon the Rhine and Danube, and consisted of sixteen
      legions, in the following proportions: two in the Lower, and
      three in the Upper Germany; one in Rhætia, one in Noricum, four
      in Pannonia, three in Mæsia, and two in Dacia. The defence of the
      Euphrates was intrusted to eight legions, six of whom were
      planted in Syria, and the other two in Cappadocia. With regard to
      Egypt, Africa, and Spain, as they were far removed from any
      important scene of war, a single legion maintained the domestic
      tranquillity of each of those great provinces. Even Italy was not
      left destitute of a military force. Above twenty thousand chosen
      soldiers, distinguished by the titles of City Cohorts and
      Prætorian Guards, watched over the safety of the monarch and the
      capital. As the authors of almost every revolution that
      distracted the empire, the Prætorians will, very soon, and very
      loudly, demand our attention; but, in their arms and
      institutions, we cannot find any circumstance which discriminated
      them from the legions, unless it were a more splendid appearance,
      and a less rigid discipline. 65


      65 (return) [ Tacitus (Annal. iv. 5) has given us a state of the
      legions under Tiberius; and Dion Cassius (l. lv. p. 794) under
      Alexander Severus. I have endeavored to fix on the proper medium
      between these two periods. See likewise Lipsius de Magnitudine
      Romana, l. i. c. 4, 5.]


      The navy maintained by the emperors might seem inadequate to
      their greatness; but it was fully sufficient for every useful
      purpose of government. The ambition of the Romans was confined to
      the land; nor was that warlike people ever actuated by the
      enterprising spirit which had prompted the navigators of Tyre, of
      Carthage, and even of Marseilles, to enlarge the bounds of the
      world, and to explore the most remote coasts of the ocean. To the
      Romans the ocean remained an object of terror rather than of
      curiosity; 66 the whole extent of the Mediterranean, after the
      destruction of Carthage, and the extirpation of the pirates, was
      included within their provinces. The policy of the emperors was
      directed only to preserve the peaceful dominion of that sea, and
      to protect the commerce of their subjects. With these moderate
      views, Augustus stationed two permanent fleets in the most
      convenient ports of Italy, the one at Ravenna, on the Adriatic,
      the other at Misenum, in the Bay of Naples. Experience seems at
      length to have convinced the ancients, that as soon as their
      galleys exceeded two, or at the most three ranks of oars, they
      were suited rather for vain pomp than for real service. Augustus
      himself, in the victory of Actium, had seen the superiority of
      his own light frigates (they were called Liburnians) over the
      lofty but unwieldy castles of his rival. 67 Of these Liburnians
      he composed the two fleets of Ravenna and Misenum, destined to
      command, the one the eastern, the other the western division of
      the Mediterranean; and to each of the squadrons he attached a
      body of several thousand marines. Besides these two ports, which
      may be considered as the principal seats of the Roman navy, a
      very considerable force was stationed at Frejus, on the coast of
      Provence, and the Euxine was guarded by forty ships, and three
      thousand soldiers. To all these we add the fleet which preserved
      the communication between Gaul and Britain, and a great number of
      vessels constantly maintained on the Rhine and Danube, to harass
      the country, or to intercept the passage of the barbarians. 68 If
      we review this general state of the Imperial forces; of the
      cavalry as well as infantry; of the legions, the auxiliaries, the
      guards, and the navy; the most liberal computation will not allow
      us to fix the entire establishment by sea and by land at more
      than four hundred and fifty thousand men: a military power,
      which, however formidable it may seem, was equalled by a monarch
      of the last century, whose kingdom was confined within a single
      province of the Roman empire. 69


      66 (return) [ The Romans tried to disguise, by the pretence of
      religious awe their ignorance and terror. See Tacit. Germania, c.
      34.]


      67 (return) [ Plutarch, in Marc. Anton. [c. 67.] And yet, if we
      may credit Orosius, these monstrous castles were no more than ten
      feet above the water, vi. 19.]


      68 (return) [ See Lipsius, de Magnitud. Rom. l. i. c. 5. The
      sixteen last chapters of Vegetius relate to naval affairs.]


      69 (return) [ Voltaire, Siecle de Louis XIV. c. 29. It must,
      however, be remembered, that France still feels that
      extraordinary effort.]


      We have attempted to explain the spirit which moderated, and the
      strength which supported, the power of Hadrian and the Antonines.
      We shall now endeavor, with clearness and precision, to describe
      the provinces once united under their sway, but, at present,
      divided into so many independent and hostile states. Spain, the
      western extremity of the empire, of Europe, and of the ancient
      world, has, in every age, invariably preserved the same natural
      limits; the Pyrenæan Mountains, the Mediterranean, and the
      Atlantic Ocean. That great peninsula, at present so unequally
      divided between two sovereigns, was distributed by Augustus into
      three provinces, Lusitania, Bætica, and Tarraconensis. The
      kingdom of Portugal now fills the place of the warlike country of
      the Lusitanians; and the loss sustained by the former on the side
      of the East, is compensated by an accession of territory towards
      the North. The confines of Grenada and Andalusia correspond with
      those of ancient Bætica. The remainder of Spain, Gallicia, and
      the Asturias, Biscay, and Navarre, Leon, and the two Castiles,
      Murcia, Valencia, Catalonia, and Arragon, all contributed to form
      the third and most considerable of the Roman governments, which,
      from the name of its capital, was styled the province of
      Tarragona. 70 Of the native barbarians, the Celtiberians were the
      most powerful, as the Cantabrians and Asturians proved the most
      obstinate. Confident in the strength of their mountains, they
      were the last who submitted to the arms of Rome, and the first
      who threw off the yoke of the Arabs.


      70 (return) [ See Strabo, l. ii. It is natural enough to suppose,
      that Arragon is derived from Tarraconensis, and several moderns
      who have written in Latin use those words as synonymous. It is,
      however, certain, that the Arragon, a little stream which falls
      from the Pyrenees into the Ebro, first gave its name to a
      country, and gradually to a kingdom. See d’Anville, Geographie du
      Moyen Age, p. 181.]


      Ancient Gaul, as it contained the whole country between the
      Pyrenees, the Alps, the Rhine, and the Ocean, was of greater
      extent than modern France. To the dominions of that powerful
      monarchy, with its recent acquisitions of Alsace and Lorraine, we
      must add the duchy of Savoy, the cantons of Switzerland, the four
      electorates of the Rhine, and the territories of Liege,
      Luxemburgh, Hainault, Flanders, and Brabant. When Augustus gave
      laws to the conquests of his father, he introduced a division of
      Gaul, equally adapted to the progress of the legions, to the
      course of the rivers, and to the principal national distinctions,
      which had comprehended above a hundred independent states. 71 The
      sea-coast of the Mediterranean, Languedoc, Provence, and
      Dauphiné, received their provincial appellation from the colony
      of Narbonne. The government of Aquitaine was extended from the
      Pyrenees to the Loire. The country between the Loire and the
      Seine was styled the Celtic Gaul, and soon borrowed a new
      denomination from the celebrated colony of Lugdunum, or Lyons.
      The Belgic lay beyond the Seine, and in more ancient times had
      been bounded only by the Rhine; but a little before the age of
      Cæsar, the Germans, abusing their superiority of valor, had
      occupied a considerable portion of the Belgic territory. The
      Roman conquerors very eagerly embraced so flattering a
      circumstance, and the Gallic frontier of the Rhine, from Basil to
      Leyden, received the pompous names of the Upper and the Lower
      Germany. 72 Such, under the reign of the Antonines, were the six
      provinces of Gaul; the Narbonnese, Aquitaine, the Celtic, or
      Lyonnese, the Belgic, and the two Germanies.


      71 (return) [ One hundred and fifteen _cities_ appear in the
      Notitia of Gaul; and it is well known that this appellation was
      applied not only to the capital town, but to the whole territory
      of each state. But Plutarch and Appian increase the number of
      tribes to three or four hundred.]


      72 (return) [ D’Anville. Notice de l’Ancienne Gaule.]


      We have already had occasion to mention the conquest of Britain,
      and to fix the boundary of the Roman Province in this island. It
      comprehended all England, Wales, and the Lowlands of Scotland, as
      far as the Friths of Dumbarton and Edinburgh. Before Britain lost
      her freedom, the country was irregularly divided between thirty
      tribes of barbarians, of whom the most considerable were the
      Belgæ in the West, the Brigantes in the North, the Silures in
      South Wales, and the Iceni in Norfolk and Suffolk. 73 As far as
      we can either trace or credit the resemblance of manners and
      language, Spain, Gaul, and Britain were peopled by the same hardy
      race of savages. Before they yielded to the Roman arms, they
      often disputed the field, and often renewed the contest. After
      their submission, they constituted the western division of the
      European provinces, which extended from the columns of Hercules
      to the wall of Antoninus, and from the mouth of the Tagus to the
      sources of the Rhine and Danube.


      73 (return) [ Whittaker’s History of Manchester, vol. i. c. 3.]
      Before the Roman conquest, the country which is now called
      Lombardy, was not considered as a part of Italy. It had been
      occupied by a powerful colony of Gauls, who, settling themselves
      along the banks of the Po, from Piedmont to Romagna, carried
      their arms and diffused their name from the Alps to the Apennine.


      The Ligurians dwelt on the rocky coast which now forms the
      republic of Genoa. Venice was yet unborn; but the territories of
      that state, which lie to the east of the Adige, were inhabited by
      the Venetians. 74 The middle part of the peninsula, that now
      composes the duchy of Tuscany and the ecclesiastical state, was
      the ancient seat of the Etruscans and Umbrians; to the former of
      whom Italy was indebted for the first rudiments of civilized
      life. 75 The Tyber rolled at the foot of the seven hills of Rome,
      and the country of the Sabines, the Latins, and the Volsci, from
      that river to the frontiers of Naples, was the theatre of her
      infant victories. On that celebrated ground the first consuls
      deserved triumphs, their successors adorned villas, and _their_
      posterity have erected convents. 76 Capua and Campania possessed
      the immediate territory of Naples; the rest of the kingdom was
      inhabited by many warlike nations, the Marsi, the Samnites, the
      Apulians, and the Lucanians; and the sea-coasts had been covered
      by the flourishing colonies of the Greeks. We may remark, that
      when Augustus divided Italy into eleven regions, the little
      province of Istria was annexed to that seat of Roman sovereignty.
      77


      74 (return) [ The Italian Veneti, though often confounded with
      the Gauls, were more probably of Illyrian origin. See M. Freret,
      Mémoires de l’Académie des Inscriptions, tom. xviii. * Note: Or
      Liburnian, according to Niebuhr. Vol. i. p. 172.—M.]


      75 (return) [ See Maffei Verona illustrata, l. i. * Note: Add
      Niebuhr, vol. i., and Otfried Müller, _die Etrusker_, which
      contains much that is known, and much that is conjectured, about
      this remarkable people. Also Micali, Storia degli antichi popoli
      Italiani. Florence, 1832—M.]


      76 (return) [ The first contrast was observed by the ancients.
      See Florus, i. 11. The second must strike every modern
      traveller.]


      77 (return) [ Pliny (Hist. Natur. l. iii.) follows the division
      of Italy by Augustus.]


      The European provinces of Rome were protected by the course of
      the Rhine and the Danube. The latter of those mighty streams,
      which rises at the distance of only thirty miles from the former,
      flows above thirteen hundred miles, for the most part to the
      south-east, collects the tribute of sixty navigable rivers, and
      is, at length, through six mouths, received into the Euxine,
      which appears scarcely equal to such an accession of waters. 78
      The provinces of the Danube soon acquired the general appellation
      of Illyricum, or the Illyrian frontier, 79 and were esteemed the
      most warlike of the empire; but they deserve to be more
      particularly considered under the names of Rhætia, Noricum,
      Pannonia, Dalmatia, Dacia, Mæsia, Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece.


      78 (return) [ Tournefort, Voyages en Grece et Asie Mineure,
      lettre xviii.]


      79 (return) [ The name of Illyricum originally belonged to the
      sea-coast of the Adriatic, and was gradually extended by the
      Romans from the Alps to the Euxine Sea. See Severini Pannonia, l.
      i. c. 3.]


      The province of Rhætia, which soon extinguished the name of the
      Vindelicians, extended from the summit of the Alps to the banks
      of the Danube; from its source, as far as its conflux with the
      Inn. The greatest part of the flat country is subject to the
      elector of Bavaria; the city of Augsburg is protected by the
      constitution of the German empire; the Grisons are safe in their
      mountains, and the country of Tirol is ranked among the numerous
      provinces of the house of Austria.


      The wide extent of territory which is included between the Inn,
      the Danube, and the Save,—Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola,
      the Lower Hungary, and Sclavonia,—was known to the ancients under
      the names of Noricum and Pannonia. In their original state of
      independence, their fierce inhabitants were intimately connected.
      Under the Roman government they were frequently united, and they
      still remain the patrimony of a single family. They now contain
      the residence of a German prince, who styles himself Emperor of
      the Romans, and form the centre, as well as strength, of the
      Austrian power. It may not be improper to observe, that if we
      except Bohemia, Moravia, the northern skirts of Austria, and a
      part of Hungary between the Teyss and the Danube, all the other
      dominions of the House of Austria were comprised within the
      limits of the Roman Empire.


      Dalmatia, to which the name of Illyricum more properly belonged,
      was a long, but narrow tract, between the Save and the Adriatic.
      The best part of the sea-coast, which still retains its ancient
      appellation, is a province of the Venetian state, and the seat of
      the little republic of Ragusa. The inland parts have assumed the
      Sclavonian names of Croatia and Bosnia; the former obeys an
      Austrian governor, the latter a Turkish pacha; but the whole
      country is still infested by tribes of barbarians, whose savage
      independence irregularly marks the doubtful limit of the
      Christian and Mahometan power. 80


      80 (return) [ A Venetian traveller, the Abbate Fortis, has lately
      given us some account of those very obscure countries. But the
      geography and antiquities of the western Illyricum can be
      expected only from the munificence of the emperor, its
      sovereign.]


      After the Danube had received the waters of the Teyss and the
      Save, it acquired, at least among the Greeks, the name of Ister.
      81 It formerly divided Mæsia and Dacia, the latter of which, as
      we have already seen, was a conquest of Trajan, and the only
      province beyond the river. If we inquire into the present state
      of those countries, we shall find that, on the left hand of the
      Danube, Temeswar and Transylvania have been annexed, after many
      revolutions, to the crown of Hungary; whilst the principalities
      of Moldavia and Wallachia acknowledge the supremacy of the
      Ottoman Porte. On the right hand of the Danube, Mæsia, which,
      during the middle ages, was broken into the barbarian kingdoms of
      Servia and Bulgaria, is again united in Turkish slavery.


      81 (return) [ The Save rises near the confines of _Istria_, and
      was considered by the more early Greeks as the principal stream
      of the Danube.]


      The appellation of Roumelia, which is still bestowed by the Turks
      on the extensive countries of Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece,
      preserves the memory of their ancient state under the Roman
      empire. In the time of the Antonines, the martial regions of
      Thrace, from the mountains of Hæmus and Rhodope, to the Bosphorus
      and the Hellespont, had assumed the form of a province.
      Notwithstanding the change of masters and of religion, the new
      city of Rome, founded by Constantine on the banks of the
      Bosphorus, has ever since remained the capital of a great
      monarchy. The kingdom of Macedonia, which, under the reign of
      Alexander, gave laws to Asia, derived more solid advantages from
      the policy of the two Philips; and with its dependencies of
      Epirus and Thessaly, extended from the Ægean to the Ionian Sea.
      When we reflect on the fame of Thebes and Argos, of Sparta and
      Athens, we can scarcely persuade ourselves, that so many immortal
      republics of ancient Greece were lost in a single province of the
      Roman empire, which, from the superior influence of the Achæan
      league, was usually denominated the province of Achaia.


      Such was the state of Europe under the Roman emperors. The
      provinces of Asia, without excepting the transient conquests of
      Trajan, are all comprehended within the limits of the Turkish
      power. But, instead of following the arbitrary divisions of
      despotism and ignorance, it will be safer for us, as well as more
      agreeable, to observe the indelible characters of nature. The
      name of Asia Minor is attributed with some propriety to the
      peninsula, which, confined betwixt the Euxine and the
      Mediterranean, advances from the Euphrates towards Europe. The
      most extensive and flourishing district, westward of Mount Taurus
      and the River Halys, was dignified by the Romans with the
      exclusive title of Asia. The jurisdiction of that province
      extended over the ancient monarchies of Troy, Lydia, and Phrygia,
      the maritime countries of the Pamphylians, Lycians, and Carians,
      and the Grecian colonies of Ionia, which equalled in arts, though
      not in arms, the glory of their parent. The kingdoms of Bithynia
      and Pontus possessed the northern side of the peninsula from
      Constantinople to Trebizond. On the opposite side, the province
      of Cilicia was terminated by the mountains of Syria: the inland
      country, separated from the Roman Asia by the River Halys, and
      from Armenia by the Euphrates, had once formed the independent
      kingdom of Cappadocia. In this place we may observe, that the
      northern shores of the Euxine, beyond Trebizond in Asia, and
      beyond the Danube in Europe, acknowledged the sovereignty of the
      emperors, and received at their hands either tributary princes or
      Roman garrisons. Budzak, Crim Tartary, Circassia, and Mingrelia,
      are the modern appellations of those savage countries. 82


      82 (return) [ See the Periplus of Arrian. He examined the coasts
      of the Euxine, when he was governor of Cappadocia.]


      Under the successors of Alexander, Syria was the seat of the
      Seleucidæ, who reigned over Upper Asia, till the successful
      revolt of the Parthians confined their dominions between the
      Euphrates and the Mediterranean. When Syria became subject to the
      Romans, it formed the eastern frontier of their empire: nor did
      that province, in its utmost latitude, know any other bounds than
      the mountains of Cappadocia to the north, and towards the south,
      the confines of Egypt, and the Red Sea. Phœnicia and Palestine
      were sometimes annexed to, and sometimes separated from, the
      jurisdiction of Syria. The former of these was a narrow and rocky
      coast; the latter was a territory scarcely superior to Wales,
      either in fertility or extent. 821 Yet Phœnicia and Palestine
      will forever live in the memory of mankind; since America, as
      well as Europe, has received letters from the one, and religion
      from the other. 83 A sandy desert, alike destitute of wood and
      water, skirts along the doubtful confine of Syria, from the
      Euphrates to the Red Sea. The wandering life of the Arabs was
      inseparably connected with their independence; and wherever, on
      some spots less barren than the rest, they ventured to for many
      settled habitations, they soon became subjects to the Roman
      empire. 84


      821 (return) [ This comparison is exaggerated, with the
      intention, no doubt, of attacking the authority of the Bible,
      which boasts of the fertility of Palestine. Gibbon’s only
      authorities were that of Strabo (l. xvi. 1104) and the present
      state of the country. But Strabo only speaks of the neighborhood
      of Jerusalem, which he calls barren and arid to the extent of
      sixty stadia round the city: in other parts he gives a favorable
      testimony to the fertility of many parts of Palestine: thus he
      says, “Near Jericho there is a grove of palms, and a country of a
      hundred stadia, full of springs, and well peopled.” Moreover,
      Strabo had never seen Palestine; he spoke only after reports,
      which may be as inaccurate as those according to which he has
      composed that description of Germany, in which Gluverius has
      detected so many errors. (Gluv. Germ. iii. 1.) Finally, his
      testimony is contradicted and refuted by that of other ancient
      authors, and by medals. Tacitus says, in speaking of Palestine,
      “The inhabitants are healthy and robust; the rains moderate; the
      soil fertile.” (Hist. v. 6.) Ammianus Macellinus says also, “The
      last of the Syrias is Palestine, a country of considerable
      extent, abounding in clean and well-cultivated land, and
      containing some fine cities, none of which yields to the other;
      but, as it were, being on a parallel, are rivals.”—xiv. 8. See
      also the historian Josephus, Hist. vi. 1. Procopius of Cæserea,
      who lived in the sixth century, says that Chosroes, king of
      Persia, had a great desire to make himself master of Palestine,
      _on account of its_ extraordinary fertility, its opulence, and
      the great number of its inhabitants. The Saracens thought the
      same, and were afraid that Omar. when he went to Jerusalem,
      charmed with the fertility of the soil and the purity of the air,
      would never return to Medina. (Ockley, Hist. of Sarac. i. 232.)
      The importance attached by the Romans to the conquest of
      Palestine, and the obstacles they encountered, prove also the
      richness and population of the country. Vespasian and Titus
      caused medals to be struck with trophies, in which Palestine is
      represented by a female under a palm-tree, to signify the
      richness of he country, with this legend: _Judæa capta_. Other
      medals also indicate this fertility; for instance, that of Herod
      holding a bunch of grapes, and that of the young Agrippa
      displaying fruit. As to the present state of he country, one
      perceives that it is not fair to draw any inference against its
      ancient fertility: the disasters through which it has passed, the
      government to which it is subject, the disposition of the
      inhabitants, explain sufficiently the wild and uncultivated
      appearance of the land, where, nevertheless, fertile and
      cultivated districts are still found, according to the testimony
      of travellers; among others, of Shaw, Maundrel, La Rocque, &c.—G.
      The Abbé Guénée, in his _Lettres de quelques Juifs à Mons. de
      Voltaire_, has exhausted the subject of the fertility of
      Palestine; for Voltaire had likewise indulged in sarcasm on this
      subject. Gibbon was assailed on this point, not, indeed, by Mr.
      Davis, who, he slyly insinuates, was prevented by his patriotism
      as a Welshman from resenting the comparison with Wales, but by
      other writers. In his Vindication, he first established the
      correctness of his measurement of Palestine, which he estimates
      as 7600 square English miles, while Wales is about 7011. As to
      fertility, he proceeds in the following dexterously composed and
      splendid passage: “The emperor Frederick II., the enemy and the
      victim of the clergy, is accused of saying, after his return from
      his crusade, that the God of the Jews would have despised his
      promised land, if he had once seen the fruitful realms of Sicily
      and Naples.” (See Giannone, Istor. Civ. del R. di Napoli, ii.
      245.) This raillery, which malice has, perhaps, falsely imputed
      to Frederick, is inconsistent with truth and piety; yet it must
      be confessed that the soil of Palestine does not contain that
      inexhaustible, and, as it were, spontaneous principle of
      fertility, which, under the most unfavorable circumstances, has
      covered with rich harvests the banks of the Nile, the fields of
      Sicily, or the plains of Poland. The Jordan is the only navigable
      river of Palestine: a considerable part of the narrow space is
      occupied, or rather lost, in the _Dead Sea_ whose horrid aspect
      inspires every sensation of disgust, and countenances every tale
      of horror. The districts which border on Arabia partake of the
      sandy quality of the adjacent desert. The face of the country,
      except the sea-coast, and the valley of the Jordan, is covered
      with mountains, which appear, for the most part, as naked and
      barren rocks; and in the neighborhood of Jerusalem, there is a
      real scarcity of the two elements of earth and water. (See
      Maundrel’s Travels, p. 65, and Reland’s Palestin. i. 238, 395.)
      These disadvantages, which now operate in their fullest extent,
      were formerly corrected by the labors of a numerous people, and
      the active protection of a wise government. The hills were
      clothed with rich beds of artificial mould, the rain was
      collected in vast cisterns, a supply of fresh water was conveyed
      by pipes and aqueducts to the dry lands. The breed of cattle was
      encouraged in those parts which were not adapted for tillage, and
      almost every spot was compelled to yield some production for the
      use of the inhabitants.


      Pater ispe colendi Haud facilem esse viam voluit, primusque par
      artem Movit agros; curis acuens mortalia corda, Nec torpere gravi
      passus sua Regna veterno. Gibbon, Misc. Works, iv. 540.


      But Gibbon has here eluded the question about the land “flowing
      with milk and honey.” He is describing Judæa only, without
      comprehending Galilee, or the rich pastures beyond the Jordan,
      even now proverbial for their flocks and herds. (See Burckhardt’s
      Travels, and Hist of Jews, i. 178.) The following is believed to
      be a fair statement: “The extraordinary fertility of the whole
      country must be taken into the account. No part was waste; very
      little was occupied by unprofitable wood; the more fertile hills
      were cultivated in artificial terraces, others were hung with
      orchards of fruit trees the more rocky and barren districts were
      covered with vineyards.” Even in the present day, the wars and
      misgovernment of ages have not exhausted the natural richness of
      the soil. “Galilee,” says Malte Brun, “would be a paradise were
      it inhabited by an industrious people under an enlightened
      government. No land could be less dependent on foreign
      importation; it bore within itself every thing that could be
      necessary for the subsistence and comfort of a simple
      agricultural people. The climate was healthy, the seasons
      regular; the former rains, which fell about October, after the
      vintage, prepared the ground for the seed; that latter, which
      prevailed during March and the beginning of April, made it grow
      rapidly. Directly the rains ceased, the grain ripened with still
      greater rapidity, and was gathered in before the end of May. The
      summer months were dry and very hot, but the nights cool and
      refreshed by copious dews. In September, the vintage was
      gathered. Grain of all kinds, wheat, barley, millet, zea, and
      other sorts, grew in abundance; the wheat commonly yielded thirty
      for one. Besides the vine and the olive, the almond, the date,
      figs of many kinds, the orange, the pomegranate, and many other
      fruit trees, flourished in the greatest luxuriance. Great
      quantity of honey was collected. The balm-tree, which produced
      the opobalsamum, a great object of trade, was probably introduced
      from Arabia, in the time of Solomon. It flourished about Jericho
      and in Gilead.”—Milman’s Hist. of Jews. i. 177.—M.]


      83 (return) [ The progress of religion is well known. The use of
      letter was introduced among the savages of Europe about fifteen
      hundred years before Christ; and the Europeans carried them to
      America about fifteen centuries after the Christian Æra. But in a
      period of three thousand years, the Phœnician alphabet received
      considerable alterations, as it passed through the hands of the
      Greeks and Romans.]


      84 (return) [ Dion Cassius, lib. lxviii. p. 1131.]

