  15 (return) [ Two consuls were created on the Calends of January;
      but in the course of the year others were substituted in their
      places, till the annual number seems to have amounted to no less
      than twelve. The prætors were usually sixteen or eighteen,
      (Lipsius in Excurs. D. ad Tacit. Annal. l. i.) I have not
      mentioned the Ædiles or Quæstors Officers of the police or
      revenue easily adapt themselves to any form of government. In the
      time of Nero, the tribunes legally possessed the right of
      intercession, though it might be dangerous to exercise it (Tacit.
      Annal. xvi. 26.) In the time of Trajan, it was doubtful whether
      the tribuneship was an office or a name, (Plin. Epist. i. 23.)]


      16 (return) [ The tyrants themselves were ambitious of the
      consulship. The virtuous princes were moderate in the pursuit,
      and exact in the discharge of it. Trajan revived the ancient
      oath, and swore before the consul’s tribunal that he would
      observe the laws, (Plin. Panegyric c. 64.)]


      17 (return) [ Quoties Magistratuum Comitiis interesset. Tribus
      cum candidatis suis circunbat: supplicabatque more solemni.
      Ferebat et ipse suffragium in tribubus, ut unus e populo.
      Suetonius in August c. 56.]


      18 (return) [ Tum primum Comitia e campo ad patres translata
      sunt. Tacit. Annal. i. 15. The word primum seems to allude to
      some faint and unsuccessful efforts which were made towards
      restoring them to the people. Note: The emperor Caligula made the
      attempt: he rest red the Comitia to the people, but, in a short
      time, took them away again. Suet. in Caio. c. 16. Dion. lix. 9,
      20. Nevertheless, at the time of Dion, they preserved still the
      form of the Comitia. Dion. lviii. 20.—W.]


      By declaring themselves the protectors of the people, Marius and
      Cæsar had subverted the constitution of their country. But as
      soon as the senate had been humbled and disarmed, such an
      assembly, consisting of five or six hundred persons, was found a
      much more tractable and useful instrument of dominion. It was on
      the dignity of the senate that Augustus and his successors
      founded their new empire; and they affected, on every occasion,
      to adopt the language and principles of Patricians. In the
      administration of their own powers, they frequently consulted the
      great national council, and _seemed_ to refer to its decision the
      most important concerns of peace and war. Rome, Italy, and the
      internal provinces, were subject to the immediate jurisdiction of
      the senate. With regard to civil objects, it was the supreme
      court of appeal; with regard to criminal matters, a tribunal,
      constituted for the trial of all offences that were committed by
      men in any public station, or that affected the peace and majesty
      of the Roman people. The exercise of the judicial power became
      the most frequent and serious occupation of the senate; and the
      important causes that were pleaded before them afforded a last
      refuge to the spirit of ancient eloquence. As a council of state,
      and as a court of justice, the senate possessed very considerable
      prerogatives; but in its legislative capacity, in which it was
      supposed virtually to represent the people, the rights of
      sovereignty were acknowledged to reside in that assembly. Every
      power was derived from their authority, every law was ratified by
      their sanction. Their regular meetings were held on three stated
      days in every month, the Calends, the Nones, and the Ides. The
      debates were conducted with decent freedom; and the emperors
      themselves, who gloried in the name of senators, sat, voted, and
      divided with their equals. To resume, in a few words, the system
      of the Imperial government; as it was instituted by Augustus, and
      maintained by those princes who understood their own interest and
      that of the people, it may be defined an absolute monarchy
      disguised by the forms of a commonwealth. The masters of the
      Roman world surrounded their throne with darkness, concealed
      their irresistible strength, and humbly professed themselves the
      accountable ministers of the senate, whose supreme decrees they
      dictated and obeyed. 19


      19 (return) [Dion Cassius (l. liii. p. 703—714) has given a very
      loose and partial sketch of the Imperial system. To illustrate
      and often to correct him, I have meditated Tacitus, examined
      Suetonius, and consulted the following moderns: the Abbé de la
      Bleterie, in the Memoires de l’Academie des Inscriptions, tom.
      xix. xxi. xxiv. xxv. xxvii. Beaufort Republique Romaine, tom. i.
      p. 255—275. The Dissertations of Noodt and Gronovius de lege
      Regia, printed at Leyden, in the year 1731 Gravina de Imperio
      Romano, p. 479—544 of his Opuscula. Maffei, Verona Illustrata, p.
      i. p. 245, &c.]


      The face of the court corresponded with the forms of the
      administration. The emperors, if we except those tyrants whose
      capricious folly violated every law of nature and decency,
      disdained that pomp and ceremony which might offend their
      countrymen, but could add nothing to their real power. In all the
      offices of life, they affected to confound themselves with their
      subjects, and maintained with them an equal intercourse of visits
      and entertainments. Their habit, their palace, their table, were
      suited only to the rank of an opulent senator. Their family,
      however numerous or splendid, was composed entirely of their
      domestic slaves and freedmen. 20 Augustus or Trajan would have
      blushed at employing the meanest of the Romans in those menial
      offices, which, in the household and bedchamber of a limited
      monarch, are so eagerly solicited by the proudest nobles of
      Britain.


      20 (return) [ A weak prince will always be governed by his
      domestics. The power of slaves aggravated the shame of the
      Romans; and the senate paid court to a Pallas or a Narcissus.
      There is a chance that a modern favorite may be a gentleman.]


      The deification of the emperors 21 is the only instance in which
      they departed from their accustomed prudence and modesty. The
      Asiatic Greeks were the first inventors, the successors of
      Alexander the first objects, of this servile and impious mode of
      adulation. 211 It was easily transferred from the kings to the
      governors of Asia; and the Roman magistrates very frequently were
      adored as provincial deities, with the pomp of altars and
      temples, of festivals and sacrifices. 22 It was natural that the
      emperors should not refuse what the proconsuls had accepted; and
      the divine honors which both the one and the other received from
      the provinces, attested rather the despotism than the servitude
      of Rome. But the conquerors soon imitated the vanquished nations
      in the arts of flattery; and the imperious spirit of the first
      Cæsar too easily consented to assume, during his lifetime, a
      place among the tutelar deities of Rome. The milder temper of his
      successor declined so dangerous an ambition, which was never
      afterwards revived, except by the madness of Caligula and
      Domitian. Augustus permitted indeed some of the provincial cities
      to erect temples to his honor, on condition that they should
      associate the worship of Rome with that of the sovereign; he
      tolerated private superstition, of which he might be the object;
      23 but he contented himself with being revered by the senate and
      the people in his human character, and wisely left to his
      successor the care of his public deification. A regular custom
      was introduced, that on the decease of every emperor who had
      neither lived nor died like a tyrant, the senate by a solemn
      decree should place him in the number of the gods: and the
      ceremonies of his apotheosis were blended with those of his
      funeral. 231 This legal, and, as it should seem, injudicious
      profanation, so abhorrent to our stricter principles, was
      received with a very faint murmur, 24 by the easy nature of
      Polytheism; but it was received as an institution, not of
      religion, but of policy. We should disgrace the virtues of the
      Antonines by comparing them with the vices of Hercules or
      Jupiter. Even the characters of Cæsar or Augustus were far
      superior to those of the popular deities. But it was the
      misfortune of the former to live in an enlightened age, and their
      actions were too faithfully recorded to admit of such a mixture
      of fable and mystery, as the devotion of the vulgar requires. As
      soon as their divinity was established by law, it sunk into
      oblivion, without contributing either to their own fame, or to
      the dignity of succeeding princes.


      21 (return) [ See a treatise of Vandale de Consecratione
      Principium. It would be easier for me to copy, than it has been
      to verify, the quotations of that learned Dutchman.]


      211 (return) [ This is inaccurate. The successors of Alexander
      were not the first deified sovereigns; the Egyptians had deified
      and worshipped many of their kings; the Olympus of the Greeks was
      peopled with divinities who had reigned on earth; finally,
      Romulus himself had received the honors of an apotheosis (Tit.
      Liv. i. 16) a long time before Alexander and his successors. It
      is also an inaccuracy to confound the honors offered in the
      provinces to the Roman governors, by temples and altars, with the
      true apotheosis of the emperors; it was not a religious worship,
      for it had neither priests nor sacrifices. Augustus was severely
      blamed for having permitted himself to be worshipped as a god in
      the provinces, (Tac. Ann. i. 10: ) he would not have incurred
      that blame if he had only done what the governors were accustomed
      to do.—G. from W. M. Guizot has been guilty of a still greater
      inaccuracy in confounding the deification of the living with the
      apotheosis of the dead emperors. The nature of the king-worship
      of Egypt is still very obscure; the hero-worship of the Greeks
      very different from the adoration of the “præsens numen” in the
      reigning sovereign.—M.]


      22 (return) [ See a dissertation of the Abbé Mongault in the
      first volume of the Academy of Inscriptions.]


      23 (return) [ Jurandasque tuum per nomen ponimus aras, says
      Horace to the emperor himself, and Horace was well acquainted
      with the court of Augustus. Note: The good princes were not those
      who alone obtained the honors of an apotheosis: it was conferred
      on many tyrants. See an excellent treatise of Schæpflin, de
      Consecratione Imperatorum Romanorum, in his Commentationes
      historicæ et criticæ. Bale, 1741, p. 184.—W.]


      231 (return) [ The curious satire in the works of Seneca, is the
      strongest remonstrance of profaned religion.—M.]


      24 (return) [ See Cicero in Philippic. i. 6. Julian in Cæsaribus.
      Inque Deum templis jurabit Roma per umbras, is the indignant
      expression of Lucan; but it is a patriotic rather than a devout
      indignation.]


      In the consideration of the Imperial government, we have
      frequently mentioned the artful founder, under his well-known
      title of Augustus, which was not, however, conferred upon him
      till the edifice was almost completed. The obscure name of
      Octavianus he derived from a mean family, in the little town of
      Aricia. 241 It was stained with the blood of the proscription;
      and he was desirous, had it been possible, to erase all memory of
      his former life. The illustrious surname of Cæsar he had assumed,
      as the adopted son of the dictator: but he had too much good
      sense, either to hope to be confounded, or to wish to be compared
      with that extraordinary man. It was proposed in the senate to
      dignify their minister with a new appellation; and after a
      serious discussion, that of Augustus was chosen, among several
      others, as being the most expressive of the character of peace
      and sanctity, which he uniformly affected. 25 _Augustus_ was
      therefore a personal, _Cæsar_ a family distinction. The former
      should naturally have expired with the prince on whom it was
      bestowed; and however the latter was diffused by adoption and
      female alliance, Nero was the last prince who could allege any
      hereditary claim to the honors of the Julian line. But, at the
      time of his death, the practice of a century had inseparably
      connected those appellations with the Imperial dignity, and they
      have been preserved by a long succession of emperors, Romans,
      Greeks, Franks, and Germans, from the fall of the republic to the
      present time. A distinction was, however, soon introduced. The
      sacred title of Augustus was always reserved for the monarch,
      whilst the name of Cæsar was more freely communicated to his
      relations; and, from the reign of Hadrian, at least, was
      appropriated to the second person in the state, who was
      considered as the presumptive heir of the empire. 251


      241 (return) [ Octavius was not of an obscure family, but of a
      considerable one of the equestrian order. His father, C.
      Octavius, who possessed great property, had been prætor, governor
      of Macedonia, adorned with the title of Imperator, and was on the
      point of becoming consul when he died. His mother Attia, was
      daughter of M. Attius Balbus, who had also been prætor. M.
      Anthony reproached Octavius with having been born in Aricia,
      which, nevertheless, was a considerable municipal city: he was
      vigorously refuted by Cicero. Philip. iii. c. 6.—W. Gibbon
      probably meant that the family had but recently emerged into
      notice.—M.]


      25 (return) [ Dion. Cassius, l. liii. p. 710, with the curious
      Annotations of Reimar.]


      251 (return) [ The princes who by their birth or their adoption
      belonged to the family of the Cæsars, took the name of Cæsar.
      After the death of Nero, this name designated the Imperial
      dignity itself, and afterwards the appointed successor. The time
      at which it was employed in the latter sense, cannot be fixed
      with certainty. Bach (Hist. Jurisprud. Rom. 304) affirms from
      Tacitus, H. i. 15, and Suetonius, Galba, 17, that Galba conferred
      on Piso Lucinianus the title of Cæsar, and from that time the
      term had this meaning: but these two historians simply say that
      he appointed Piso his successor, and do not mention the word
      Cæsar. Aurelius Victor (in Traj. 348, ed. Artzen) says that
      Hadrian first received this title on his adoption; but as the
      adoption of Hadrian is still doubtful, and besides this, as
      Trajan, on his death-bed, was not likely to have created a new
      title for his successor, it is more probable that Ælius Verus was
      the first who was called Cæsar when adopted by Hadrian. Spart. in
      Ælio Vero, 102.—W.]


      Chapter III: The Constitution In The Age Of The Antonines.—Part
      II.


      The tender respect of Augustus for a free constitution which he
      had destroyed, can only be explained by an attentive
      consideration of the character of that subtle tyrant. A cool
      head, an unfeeling heart, and a cowardly disposition, prompted
      him at the age of nineteen to assume the mask of hypocrisy, which
      he never afterwards laid aside. With the same hand, and probably
      with the same temper, he signed the proscription of Cicero, and
      the pardon of Cinna. His virtues, and even his vices, were
      artificial; and according to the various dictates of his
      interest, he was at first the enemy, and at last the father, of
      the Roman world. 26 When he framed the artful system of the
      Imperial authority, his moderation was inspired by his fears. He
      wished to deceive the people by an image of civil liberty, and
      the armies by an image of civil government.

