 The editor has not scrupled to transfer the notes of M. Guizot to
      the present work. The well-known zeal for knowledge, displayed in
      all the writings of that distinguished historian, has led to the
      natural inference, that he would not be displeased at the attempt
      to make them of use to the English readers of Gibbon. The notes
      of M. Guizot are signed with the letter G.


      II. The German translation, with the notes of Wenck.
      Unfortunately this learned translator died, after having
      completed only the first volume; the rest of the work was
      executed by a very inferior hand.


      The notes of Wenck are extremely valuable; many of them have been
      adopted by M. Guizot; they are distinguished by the letter W. 102


      102 (return) [ The editor regrets that he has not been able to
      find the Italian translation, mentioned by Gibbon himself with
      some respect. It is not in our great libraries, the Museum or the
      Bodleian; and he has never found any bookseller in London who has
      seen it.]


      III. The new edition of Le Beau’s “Histoire du Bas Empire, with
      notes by M. St. Martin, and M. Brosset.” That distinguished
      Armenian scholar, M. St. Martin (now, unhappily, deceased) had
      added much information from Oriental writers, particularly from
      those of Armenia, as well as from more general sources. Many of
      his observations have been found as applicable to the work of
      Gibbon as to that of Le Beau.


      IV. The editor has consulted the various answers made to Gibbon
      on the first appearance of his work; he must confess, with little
      profit. They were, in general, hastily compiled by inferior and
      now forgotten writers, with the exception of Bishop Watson, whose
      able apology is rather a general argument, than an examination of
      misstatements. The name of Milner stands higher with a certain
      class of readers, but will not carry much weight with the severe
      investigator of history.


      V. Some few classical works and fragments have come to light,
      since the appearance of Gibbon’s History, and have been noticed
      in their respective places; and much use has been made, in the
      latter volumes particularly, of the increase to our stores of
      Oriental literature. The editor cannot, indeed, pretend to have
      followed his author, in these gleanings, over the whole vast
      field of his inquiries; he may have overlooked or may not have
      been able to command some works, which might have thrown still
      further light on these subjects; but he trusts that what he has
      adduced will be of use to the student of historic truth.


      The editor would further observe, that with regard to some other
      objectionable passages, which do not involve misstatement or
      inaccuracy, he has intentionally abstained from directing
      particular attention towards them by any special protest.


      The editor’s notes are marked M.


      A considerable part of the quotations (some of which in the later
      editions had fallen into great confusion) have been verified, and
      have been corrected by the latest and best editions of the
      authors.


      June, 1845.


      In this new edition, the text and the notes have been carefully
      revised, the latter by the editor.


      Some additional notes have been subjoined, distinguished by the
      signature M. 1845.


      Preface Of The Author.


      It is not my intention to detain the reader by expatiating on the
      variety or the importance of the subject, which I have undertaken
      to treat; since the merit of the choice would serve to render the
      weakness of the execution still more apparent, and still less
      excusable. But as I have presumed to lay before the public a
      _first_ volume only 1 of the History of the Decline and Fall of
      the Roman Empire, it will, perhaps, be expected that I should
      explain, in a few words, the nature and limits of my general
      plan.


      1 (return) [ The first volume of the quarto, which contained the
      sixteen first chapters.]


      The memorable series of revolutions, which in the course of about
      thirteen centuries gradually undermined, and at length destroyed,
      the solid fabric of human greatness, may, with some propriety, be
      divided into the three following periods:


      I. The first of these periods may be traced from the age of
      Trajan and the Antonines, when the Roman monarchy, having
      attained its full strength and maturity, began to verge towards
      its decline; and will extend to the subversion of the Western
      Empire, by the barbarians of Germany and Scythia, the rude
      ancestors of the most polished nations of modern Europe. This
      extraordinary revolution, which subjected Rome to the power of a
      Gothic conqueror, was completed about the beginning of the sixth
      century.


      II. The second period of the Decline and Fall of Rome may be
      supposed to commence with the reign of Justinian, who, by his
      laws, as well as by his victories, restored a transient splendor
      to the Eastern Empire. It will comprehend the invasion of Italy
      by the Lombards; the conquest of the Asiatic and African
      provinces by the Arabs, who embraced the religion of Mahomet; the
      revolt of the Roman people against the feeble princes of
      Constantinople; and the elevation of Charlemagne, who, in the
      year eight hundred, established the second, or German Empire of
      the West.


      III. The last and longest of these periods includes about six
      centuries and a half; from the revival of the Western Empire,
      till the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, and the
      extinction of a degenerate race of princes, who continued to
      assume the titles of Cæsar and Augustus, after their dominions
      were contracted to the limits of a single city; in which the
      language, as well as manners, of the ancient Romans, had been
      long since forgotten. The writer who should undertake to relate
      the events of this period, would find himself obliged to enter
      into the general history of the Crusades, as far as they
      contributed to the ruin of the Greek Empire; and he would
      scarcely be able to restrain his curiosity from making some
      inquiry into the state of the city of Rome, during the darkness
      and confusion of the middle ages.


      As I have ventured, perhaps too hastily, to commit to the press a
      work which in every sense of the word, deserves the epithet of
      imperfect. I consider myself as contracting an engagement to
      finish, most probably in a second volume, 2a the first of these
      memorable periods; and to deliver to the Public the complete
      History of the Decline and Fall of Rome, from the age of the
      Antonines to the subversion of the Western Empire. With regard to
      the subsequent periods, though I may entertain some hopes, I dare
      not presume to give any assurances. The execution of the
      extensive plan which I have described, would connect the ancient
      and modern history of the world; but it would require many years
      of health, of leisure, and of perseverance.


      2a (return) [ The Author, as it frequently happens, took an
      inadequate measure of his growing work. The remainder of the
      first period has filled _two_ volumes in quarto, being the third,
      fourth, fifth, and sixth volumes of the octavo edition.]


      BENTINCK STREET, _February_ 1, 1776.


      P. S. The entire History, which is now published, of the Decline
      and Fall of the Roman Empire in the West, abundantly discharges
      my engagements with the Public. Perhaps their favorable opinion
      may encourage me to prosecute a work, which, however laborious it
      may seem, is the most agreeable occupation of my leisure hours.


      BENTINCK STREET, _March_ 1, 1781.


      An Author easily persuades himself that the public opinion is
      still favorable to his labors; and I have now embraced the
      serious resolution of proceeding to the last period of my
      original design, and of the Roman Empire, the taking of
      Constantinople by the Turks, in the year one thousand four
      hundred and fifty-three. The most patient Reader, who computes
      that three ponderous 3 volumes have been already employed on the
      events of four centuries, may, perhaps, be alarmed at the long
      prospect of nine hundred years. But it is not my intention to
      expatiate with the same minuteness on the whole series of the
      Byzantine history. At our entrance into this period, the reign of
      Justinian, and the conquests of the Mahometans, will deserve and
      detain our attention, and the last age of Constantinople (the
      Crusades and the Turks) is connected with the revolutions of
      Modern Europe. From the seventh to the eleventh century, the
      obscure interval will be supplied by a concise narrative of such
      facts as may still appear either interesting or important.


      BENTINCK STREET, _March_ 1, 1782.


      3 (return) [ The first six volumes of the octavo edition.]


      Preface To The First Volume.


      Diligence and accuracy are the only merits which an historical
      writer may ascribe to himself; if any merit, indeed, can be
      assumed from the performance of an indispensable duty. I may
      therefore be allowed to say, that I have carefully examined all
      the original materials that could illustrate the subject which I
      had undertaken to treat. Should I ever complete the extensive
      design which has been sketched out in the Preface, I might
      perhaps conclude it with a critical account of the authors
      consulted during the progress of the whole work; and however such
      an attempt might incur the censure of ostentation, I am persuaded
      that it would be susceptible of entertainment, as well as
      information.


      At present I shall content myself with a single observation.


      The biographers, who, under the reigns of Diocletian and
      Constantine, composed, or rather compiled, the lives of the
      Emperors, from Hadrian to the sons of Carus, are usually
      mentioned under the names of Ælius Spartianus, Julius
      Capitolinus, Ælius Lampridius, Vulcatius Gallicanus, Trebellius
      Pollio and Flavius Vopiscus. But there is so much perplexity in
      the titles of the MSS., and so many disputes have arisen among
      the critics (see Fabricius, Biblioth. Latin. l. iii. c. 6)
      concerning their number, their names, and their respective
      property, that for the most part I have quoted them without
      distinction, under the general and well-known title of the
      _Augustan History_.


      Preface To The Fourth Volume Of The Original Quarto Edition.


      I now discharge my promise, and complete my design, of writing
      the History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, both in
      the West and the East. The whole period extends from the age of
      Trajan and the Antonines, to the taking of Constantinople by
      Mahomet the Second; and includes a review of the Crusades, and
      the state of Rome during the middle ages. Since the publication
      of the first volume, twelve years have elapsed; twelve years,
      according to my wish, “of health, of leisure, and of
      perseverance.” I may now congratulate my deliverance from a long
      and laborious service, and my satisfaction will be pure and
      perfect, if the public favor should be extended to the conclusion
      of my work.


      It was my first intention to have collected, under one view, the
      numerous authors, of every age and language, from whom I have
      derived the materials of this history; and I am still convinced
      that the apparent ostentation would be more than compensated by
      real use. If I have renounced this idea, if I have declined an
      undertaking which had obtained the approbation of a
      master-artist,4 my excuse may be found in the extreme difficulty
      of assigning a proper measure to such a catalogue. A naked list
      of names and editions would not be satisfactory either to myself
      or my readers: the characters of the principal Authors of the
      Roman and Byzantine History have been occasionally connected with
      the events which they describe; a more copious and critical
      inquiry might indeed deserve, but it would demand, an elaborate
      volume, which might swell by degrees into a general library of
      historical writers. For the present, I shall content myself with
      renewing my serious protestation, that I have always endeavored
      to draw from the fountain-head; that my curiosity, as well as a
      sense of duty, has always urged me to study the originals; and
      that, if they have sometimes eluded my search, I have carefully
      marked the secondary evidence, on whose faith a passage or a fact
      were reduced to depend.


      4 (return) [ See Dr. Robertson’s Preface to his History of
      America.]


      I shall soon revisit the banks of the Lake of Lausanne, a country
      which I have known and loved from my early youth. Under a mild
      government, amidst a beauteous landscape, in a life of leisure
      and independence, and among a people of easy and elegant manners,
      I have enjoyed, and may again hope to enjoy, the varied pleasures
      of retirement and society. But I shall ever glory in the name and
      character of an Englishman: I am proud of my birth in a free and
      enlightened country; and the approbation of that country is the
      best and most honorable reward of my labors. Were I ambitious of
      any other Patron than the Public, I would inscribe this work to a
      Statesman, who, in a long, a stormy, and at length an unfortunate
      administration, had many political opponents, almost without a
      personal enemy; who has retained, in his fall from power, many
      faithful and disinterested friends; and who, under the pressure
      of severe infirmity, enjoys the lively vigor of his mind, and the
      felicity of his incomparable temper. Lord North will permit me to
      express the feelings of friendship in the language of truth: but
      even truth and friendship should be silent, if he still dispensed
      the favors of the crown.


      In a remote solitude, vanity may still whisper in my ear, that my
      readers, perhaps, may inquire whether, in the conclusion of the
      present work, I am now taking an everlasting farewell. They shall
      hear all that I know myself, and all that I could reveal to the
      most intimate friend. The motives of action or silence are now
      equally balanced; nor can I pronounce, in my most secret
      thoughts, on which side the scale will preponderate. I cannot
      dissemble that six quartos must have tried, and may have
      exhausted, the indulgence of the Public; that, in the repetition
      of similar attempts, a successful Author has much more to lose
      than he can hope to gain; that I am now descending into the vale
      of years; and that the most respectable of my countrymen, the men
      whom I aspire to imitate, have resigned the pen of history about
      the same period of their lives. Yet I consider that the annals of
      ancient and modern times may afford many rich and interesting
      subjects; that I am still possessed of health and leisure; that
      by the practice of writing, some skill and facility must be
      acquired; and that, in the ardent pursuit of truth and knowledge,
      I am not conscious of decay. To an active mind, indolence is more
      painful than labor; and the first months of my liberty will be
      occupied and amused in the excursions of curiosity and taste. By
      such temptations, I have been sometimes seduced from the rigid
      duty even of a pleasing and voluntary task: but my time will now
      be my own; and in the use or abuse of independence, I shall no
      longer fear my own reproaches or those of my friends. I am fairly
      entitled to a year of jubilee: next summer and the following
      winter will rapidly pass away; and experience only can determine
      whether I shall still prefer the freedom and variety of study to
      the design and composition of a regular work, which animates,
      while it confines, the daily application of the Author.


      Caprice and accident may influence my choice; but the dexterity
      of self-love will contrive to applaud either active industry or
      philosophic repose.


      DOWNING STREET, _May_ 1, 1788.


      P. S. I shall embrace this opportunity of introducing two
      _verbal_ remarks, which have not conveniently offered themselves
      to my notice. 1. As often as I use the definitions of _beyond_
      the Alps, the Rhine, the Danube, &c., I generally suppose myself
      at Rome, and afterwards at Constantinople; without observing
      whether this relative geography may agree with the local, but
      variable, situation of the reader, or the historian. 2. In proper
      names of foreign, and especially of Oriental origin, it should be
      always our aim to express, in our English version, a faithful
      copy of the original. But this rule, which is founded on a just
      regard to uniformity and truth, must often be relaxed; and the
      exceptions will be limited or enlarged by the custom of the
      language and the taste of the interpreter. Our alphabets may be
      often defective; a harsh sound, an uncouth spelling, might offend
      the ear or the eye of our countrymen; and some words, notoriously
      corrupt, are fixed, and, as it were, naturalized in the vulgar
      tongue. The prophet _Mohammed_ can no longer be stripped of the
      famous, though improper, appellation of Mahomet: the well-known
      cities of Aleppo, Damascus, and Cairo, would almost be lost in
      the strange descriptions of _Haleb, Demashk_, and _Al Cahira:_
      the titles and offices of the Ottoman empire are fashioned by the
      practice of three hundred years; and we are pleased to blend the
      three Chinese monosyllables, _Con-fû-tzee_, in the respectable
      name of Confucius, or even to adopt the Portuguese corruption of
      Mandarin. But I would vary the use of Zoroaster and _Zerdusht_,
      as I drew my information from Greece or Persia: since our
      connection with India, the genuine _Timour_ is restored to the
      throne of Tamerlane: our most correct writers have retrenched the
      _Al_, the superfluous article, from the Koran; and we escape an
      ambiguous termination, by adopting _Moslem_ instead of Musulman,
      in the plural number. In these, and in a thousand examples, the
      shades of distinction are often minute; and I can feel, where I
      cannot explain, the motives of my choice.


      Chapter I: The Extent Of The Empire In The Age Of The
      Antonines—Part I.


      Introduction.

     The Extent And Military Force Of The Empire In The Age Of The
     Antonines.


      In the second century of the Christian Æra, the empire of Rome
      comprehended the fairest part of the earth, and the most
      civilized portion of mankind. The frontiers of that extensive
      monarchy were guarded by ancient renown and disciplined valor.
      The gentle but powerful influence of laws and manners had
      gradually cemented the union of the provinces. Their peaceful
      inhabitants enjoyed and abused the advantages of wealth and
      luxury. The image of a free constitution was preserved with
      decent reverence: the Roman senate appeared to possess the
      sovereign authority, and devolved on the emperors all the
      executive powers of government. During a happy period of more
      than fourscore years, the public administration was conducted by
      the virtue and abilities of Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, and the two
      Antonines. It is the design of this, and of the two succeeding
      chapters, to describe the prosperous condition of their empire;
      and afterwards, from the death of Marcus Antoninus, to deduce the
      most important circumstances of its decline and fall; a
      revolution which will ever be remembered, and is still felt by
      the nations of the earth.


      The principal conquests of the Romans were achieved under the
      republic; and the emperors, for the most part, were satisfied
      with preserving those dominions which had been acquired by the
      policy of the senate, the active emulations of the consuls, and
      the martial enthusiasm of the people. The seven first centuries
      were filled with a rapid succession of triumphs; but it was
      reserved for Augustus to relinquish the ambitious design of
      subduing the whole earth, and to introduce a spirit of moderation
      into the public councils. Inclined to peace by his temper and
      situation, it was easy for him to discover that Rome, in her
      present exalted situation, had much less to hope than to fear
      from the chance of arms; and that, in the prosecution of remote
      wars, the undertaking became every day more difficult, the event
      more doubtful, and the possession more precarious, and less
      beneficial. The experience of Augustus added weight to these
      salutary reflections, and effectually convinced him that, by the
      prudent vigor of his counsels, it would be easy to secure every
      concession which the safety or the dignity of Rome might require
      from the most formidable barbarians. Instead of exposing his
      person and his legions to the arrows of the Parthians, he
      obtained, by an honorable treaty, the restitution of the
      standards and prisoners which had been taken in the defeat of
      Crassus. 1a


      1 (return) [ Dion Cassius, (l. liv. p. 736,) with the annotations
      of Reimar, who has collected all that Roman vanity has left upon
      the subject. The marble of Ancyra, on which Augustus recorded his
      own exploits, asserted that _he compelled_ the Parthians to
      restore the ensigns of Crassus.]


      His generals, in the early part of his reign, attempted the
      reduction of Ethiopia and Arabia Felix. They marched near a
      thousand miles to the south of the tropic; but the heat of the
      climate soon repelled the invaders, and protected the un-warlike
      natives of those sequestered regions. 2c The northern countries
      of Europe scarcely deserved the expense and labor of conquest.
      The forests and morasses of Germany were filled with a hardy race
      of barbarians, who despised life when it was separated from
      freedom; and though, on the first attack, they seemed to yield to
      the weight of the Roman power, they soon, by a signal act of
      despair, regained their independence, and reminded Augustus of
      the vicissitude of fortune. 3a On the death of that emperor, his
      testament was publicly read in the senate. He bequeathed, as a
      valuable legacy to his successors, the advice of confining the
      empire within those limits which nature seemed to have placed as
      its permanent bulwarks and boundaries: on the west, the Atlantic
      Ocean; the Rhine and Danube on the north; the Euphrates on the
      east; and towards the south, the sandy deserts of Arabia and
      Africa. 4a


      2c (return) [ Strabo, (l. xvi. p. 780,) Pliny the elder, (Hist.
      Natur. l. vi. c. 32, 35, [28, 29,]) and Dion Cassius, (l. liii.
      p. 723, and l. liv. p. 734,) have left us very curious details
      concerning these wars. The Romans made themselves masters of
      Mariaba, or Merab, a city of Arabia Felix, well known to the
      Orientals. (See Abulfeda and the Nubian geography, p. 52) They
      were arrived within three days’ journey of the spice country, the
      rich object of their invasion.


      Note: It is this city of Merab that the Arabs say was the
      residence of Belkis, queen of Saba, who desired to see Solomon. A
      dam, by which the waters collected in its neighborhood were kept
      back, having been swept away, the sudden inundation destroyed
      this city, of which, nevertheless, vestiges remain. It bordered
      on a country called Adramout, where a particular aromatic plant
      grows: it is for this reason that we real in the history of the
      Roman expedition, that they were arrived within three days’
      journey of the spice country.—G. Compare _Malte-Brun, Geogr_.
      Eng. trans. vol. ii. p. 215. The period of this flood has been
      copiously discussed by Reiske, (_Program. de vetustâ Epochâ
      Arabum, rupturâ cataractæ Merabensis_.) Add. Johannsen, _Hist.
      Yemanæ_, p. 282. Bonn, 1828; and see Gibbon, note 16. to Chap.
      L.—M.


      Note: Two, according to Strabo. The detailed account of Strabo
      makes the invaders fail before Marsuabæ this cannot be the same
      place as Mariaba. Ukert observes, that Ælius Gallus would not
      have failed for want of water before Mariaba. (See M. Guizot’s
      note above.) “Either, therefore, they were different places, or
      Strabo is mistaken.” (Ukert, _Geographie der Griechen und Römer_,
      vol. i. p. 181.) Strabo, indeed, mentions Mariaba distinct from
      Marsuabæ. Gibbon has followed Pliny in reckoning Mariaba among
      the conquests of Gallus. There can be little doubt that he is
      wrong, as Gallus did not approach the capital of Sabæa. Compare
      the note of the Oxford editor of Strabo.—M.]


      3a (return) [ By the slaughter of Varus and his three legions.
      See the first book of the Annals of Tacitus. Sueton. in August.
      c. 23, and Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 117, &c. Augustus did
      not receive the melancholy news with all the temper and firmness
      that might have been expected from his character.]


      4a (return) [ Tacit. Annal. l. ii. Dion Cassius, l. lvi. p. 833,
      and the speech of Augustus himself, in Julian’s Cæsars. It
      receives great light from the learned notes of his French
      translator, M. Spanheim.]


      Happily for the repose of mankind, the moderate system
      recommended by the wisdom of Augustus, was adopted by the fears
      and vices of his immediate successors. Engaged in the pursuit of
      pleasure, or in the exercise of tyranny, the first Cæsars seldom
      showed themselves to the armies, or to the provinces; nor were
      they disposed to suffer, that those triumphs which _their_
      indolence neglected, should be usurped by the conduct and valor
      of their lieutenants. The military fame of a subject was
      considered as an insolent invasion of the Imperial prerogative;
      and it became the duty, as well as interest, of every Roman
      general, to guard the frontiers intrusted to his care, without
      aspiring to conquests which might have proved no less fatal to
      himself than to the vanquished barbarians. 5


      5 (return) [ Germanicus, Suetonius Paulinus, and Agricola were
      checked and recalled in the course of their victories. Corbulo
      was put to death. Military merit, as it is admirably expressed by
      Tacitus, was, in the strictest sense of the word, _imperatoria
      virtus_.]


      The only accession which the Roman empire received, during the
      first century of the Christian Æra, was the province of Britain.
      In this single instance, the successors of Cæsar and Augustus
      were persuaded to follow the example of the former, rather than
      the precept of the latter. The proximity of its situation to the
      coast of Gaul seemed to invite their arms; the pleasing though
      doubtful intelligence of a pearl fishery attracted their avarice;
      6 and as Britain was viewed in the light of a distinct and
      insulated world, the conquest scarcely formed any exception to
      the general system of continental measures. After a war of about
      forty years, undertaken by the most stupid, 7 maintained by the
      most dissolute, and terminated by the most timid of all the
      emperors, the far greater part of the island submitted to the
      Roman yoke. 8 The various tribes of Britain possessed valor
      without conduct, and the love of freedom without the spirit of
      union. They took up arms with savage fierceness; they laid them
      down, or turned them against each other, with wild inconsistency;
      and while they fought singly, they were successively subdued.
      Neither the fortitude of Caractacus, nor the despair of Boadicea,
      nor the fanaticism of the Druids, could avert the slavery of
      their country, or resist the steady progress of the Imperial
      generals, who maintained the national glory, when the throne was
      disgraced by the weakest, or the most vicious of mankind. At the
      very time when Domitian, confined to his palace, felt the terrors
      which he inspired, his legions, under the command of the virtuous
      Agricola, defeated the collected force of the Caledonians, at the
      foot of the Grampian Hills; and his fleets, venturing to explore
      an unknown and dangerous navigation, displayed the Roman arms
      round every part of the island. The conquest of Britain was
      considered as already achieved; and it was the design of Agricola
      to complete and insure his success, by the easy reduction of
      Ireland, for which, in his opinion, one legion and a few
      auxiliaries were sufficient. 9 The western isle might be improved
      into a valuable possession, and the Britons would wear their
      chains with the less reluctance, if the prospect and example of
      freedom were on every side removed from before their eyes.
