
Of The Union And Internal Prosperity Of The Roman Empire, In The Age Of
The Antonines.


 Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The Antonines.—Part
 II.

 Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The Antonines.—Part
 III.

 Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The Antonines. Part
 IV.

 Chapter III: The Constitution In The Age Of The Antonines.—Part I.

Of The Constitution Of The Roman Empire, In The Age Of The Antonines.


 Chapter III: The Constitution In The Age Of The Antonines.—Part II.

 Chapter IV: The Cruelty, Follies And Murder Of Commodus.—Part I.

Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis.—Part II.

Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis.—Part III.

Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis.—Part IV.

Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis.—Part V.

Chapter XXXVIII: Reign Of Clovis.—Part VI.

VOLUME FOUR

Chapter XXXIX: Gothic Kingdom Of Italy.—Part I.

Zeno And Anastasius, Emperors Of The East.—Birth, Education, And First
Exploits Of Theodoric The Ostrogoth.— His Invasion And Conquest Of
Italy.—The Gothic Kingdom Of Italy.—State Of The West.—Military And
Civil Government.— The Senator Boethius.—Last Acts And Death Of
Theodoric.


Chapter XXXIX: Gothic Kingdom Of Italy.—Part II.

Chapter XXXIX: Gothic Kingdom Of Italy.—Part III.

Chapter XL: Reign Of Justinian.—Part I.

Elevation Of Justin The Elder.—Reign Of Justinian.—I. The Empress
Theodora.—II.  Factions Of The Circus, And Sedition Of
Constantinople.—III.  Trade And Manufacture Of Silk.— IV. Finances And
Taxes.—V. Edifices Of Justinian.—Church Of St. Sophia.—Fortifications
And Frontiers Of The Eastern Empire.—Abolition Of The Schools Of
Athens, And The Consulship Of Rome.


Chapter XL: Reign Of Justinian.—Part II.

Chapter XL: Reign Of Justinian.—Part III.

Chapter XL: Reign Of Justinian.—Part IV.

Chapter XL: Reign Of Justinian.—Part V.

Chapter XLI: Conquests Of Justinian, Character Of Balisarius.—Part I.

Conquests Of Justinian In The West.—Character And First Campaigns Of
Belisarius—He Invades And Subdues The Vandal Kingdom Of Africa—His
Triumph.—The Gothic War.—He Recovers Sicily, Naples, And Rome.—Siege Of
Rome By The Goths.—Their Retreat And Losses.—Surrender Of Ravenna.—
Glory Of Belisarius.—His Domestic Shame And Misfortunes.


Chapter XLI: Conquests Of Justinian, Character Of Balisarius.—Part II.

Chapter XLI: Conquests Of Justinian, Character Of Balisarius.—Part III.

Chapter XLI: Conquests Of Justinian, Character Of Balisarius.—Part IV.

Chapter XLI: Conquests Of Justinian, Character Of Balisarius.—Part V.

Chapter XLII: State Of The Barbaric World.—Part I.

State Of The Barbaric World.—Establishment Of The Lombards On the
Danube.—Tribes And Inroads Of The Sclavonians.— Origin, Empire, And
Embassies Of The Turks.—The Flight Of The Avars.—Chosroes I, Or
Nushirvan, King Of Persia.—His Prosperous Reign And Wars With The
Romans.—The Colchian Or Lazic War.—The Æthiopians.


Chapter XLII: State Of The Barbaric World.—Part II.

Chapter XLII: State Of The Barbaric World.—Part III.

Chapter XLII: State Of The Barbaric World.—Part IV.

Chapter XLIII: Last Victory And Death Of Belisarius, Death Of
Justinian.—Part I.

Rebellions Of Africa.—Restoration Of The Gothic Kingdom By Totila.—Loss
And Recovery Of Rome.—Final Conquest Of Italy By Narses.—Extinction Of
The Ostrogoths.—Defeat Of The Franks And Alemanni.—Last Victory,
Disgrace, And Death Of Belisarius.—Death And Character Of
Justinian.—Comet, Earthquakes, And Plague.


Chapter XLIII: Last Victory And Death Of Belisarius, Death OF
Justinian.—Part II.

Chapter XLIII: Last Victory And Death Of Belisarius, Death Of
Justinian.—Part III.

Chapter XLIII: Last Victory And Death Of Belisarius, Death Of
Justinian.—Part IV.

Chapter XLIV: Idea Of The Roman Jurisprudence.—Part I.

Idea Of The Roman Jurisprudence.—The Laws Of The Kings—The Twelve Of
The Decemvirs.—The Laws Of The People.—The Decrees Of The Senate.—The
Edicts Of The Magistrates And Emperors—Authority Of The
Civilians.—Code, Pandects, Novels, And Institutes Of Justinian:—I. 
Rights Of Persons.—II. Rights Of Things.—III.  Private Injuries And
Actions.—IV. Crimes And Punishments.


Chapter XLIV: Idea Of The Roman Jurisprudence.—Part II.

Chapter XLIV: Idea Of The Roman Jurisprudence.—Part III.

Chapter XLIV: Idea Of The Roman Jurisprudence.—Part IV.

Chapter XLIV: Idea Of The Roman Jurisprudence.—Part V.

Chapter XLIV: Idea Of The Roman Jurisprudence.—Part VI.

Chapter XLIV: Idea Of The Roman Jurisprudence.—Part VII.

Chapter XLIV: Idea Of The Roman Jurisprudence.—Part VIII.

Chapter XLV: State Of Italy Under The Lombards.—Part I.

Reign Of The Younger Justin.—Embassy Of The Avars.—Their Settlement On
The Danube.—Conquest Of Italy By The Lombards.—Adoption And Reign Of
Tiberius.—Of Maurice.— State Of Italy Under The Lombards And The
Exarchs.—Of Ravenna.—Distress Of Rome.—Character And Pontificate Of
Gregory The First.


Chapter XLV: State Of Italy Under The Lombards.—Part II.

Chapter XLV: State Of Italy Under The Lombards.—Part III.

Chapter XLVI: Troubles In Persia.—Part I.

Revolutions On Persia After The Death Of Chosroes On Nushirvan.—His Son
Hormouz, A Tyrant, Is Deposed.— Usurpation Of Baharam.—Flight And
Restoration Of Chosroes II.—His Gratitude To The Romans.—The Chagan Of
The Avars.— Revolt Of The Army Against Maurice.—His Death.—Tyranny Of
Phocas.—Elevation Of Heraclius.—The Persian War.—Chosroes Subdues
Syria, Egypt, And Asia Minor.—Siege Of Constantinople By The Persians
And Avars.—Persian Expeditions.—Victories And Triumph Of Heraclius.


Chapter XLVI: Troubles In Persia.—Part II.

Chapter XLVI: Troubles In Persia.—Part III.

Chapter XLVI: Troubles In Persia.—Part IV.

Chapter XLVII: Ecclesiastical Discord.—Part I.

Theological History Of The Doctrine Of The Incarnation.—The Human And
Divine Nature Of Christ.—Enmity Of The Patriarchs Of Alexandria And
Constantinople.—St. Cyril And Nestorius. —Third General Council Of
Ephesus.—Heresy Of Eutyches.— Fourth General Council Of
Chalcedon.—Civil And Ecclesiastical Discord.—Intolerance Of
Justinian.—The Three Chapters.—The Monothelite Controversy.—State Of
The Oriental Sects:—I.  The Nestorians.—II.  The Jacobites.— III.  The
Maronites.—IV. The Armenians.—V.  The Copts And Abyssinians.


Chapter XLVII: Ecclesiastical Discord.—Part II.

Chapter XLVII: Ecclesiastical Discord.—Part III.

Chapter XLVII: Ecclesiastical Discord.—Part IV.

Chapter XLVII: Ecclesiastical Discord.—Part V.

Chapter XLVII: Ecclesiastical Discord.—Part VI.

Chapter XLVIII: Succession And Characters Of The Greek Emperors.—Part
I.

Plan Of The Two Last Volumes.—Succession And Characters Of The Greek
Emperors Of Constantinople, From The Time Of Heraclius To The Latin
Conquest.


Chapter XLVIII: Succession And Characters Of The Greek Emperors.—Part
II.

Chapter XLVIII: Succession And Characters Of The Greek Emperors.—Part
III.

Chapter XLVIII: Succession And Characters Of The Greek Emperors.—Part
IV.

Chapter XLVIII: Succession And Characters Of The Greek Emperors.—Part
V.

VOLUME FIVE

Chapter XLIX: Conquest Of Italy By The Franks.—Part I.

Introduction, Worship, And Persecution Of Images.—Revolt Of Italy And
Rome.—Temporal Dominion Of The Popes.—Conquest Of Italy By The
Franks.—Establishment Of Images.—Character And Coronation Of
Charlemagne.—Restoration And Decay Of The Roman Empire In The
West.—Independence Of Italy.— Constitution Of The Germanic Body.


Chapter XLIX: Conquest Of Italy By The Franks.—Part II.

Chapter XLIX: Conquest Of Italy By The Franks.—Part III.

Chapter XLIX: Conquest Of Italy By The Franks.—Part IV.

Chapter XLIX: Conquest Of Italy By The Franks.—Part V.

Chapter XLIX: Conquest Of Italy By The Franks.—Part VI.

Chapter L: Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.—Part I.

Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.—Birth, Character, And
Doctrine Of Mahomet.—He Preaches At Mecca.— Flies To Medina.—Propagates
His Religion By The Sword.— Voluntary Or Reluctant Submission Of The
Arabs.—His Death And Successors.—The Claims And Fortunes Of Ali And His
Descendants.


Chapter L: Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.—Part II.

Chapter L: Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.—Part III.

Chapter L: Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.—Part IV.

Chapter L: Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.—Part V.

Chapter L: Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.—Part VI.

 Chapter L: Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.—Part VII.

Chapter L: Description Of Arabia And Its Inhabitants.—Part VIII.

Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.—Part I.

The Conquest Of Persia, Syria, Egypt, Africa, And Spain, By The Arabs
Or Saracens.—Empire Of The Caliphs, Or Successors Of Mahomet.—State Of
The Christians, &c., Under Their Government.


Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.—Part II.

Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.—Part III.

Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.—Part IV.

Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.—Part V.

Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.—Part VI.

Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.—Part VII.

Chapter LII: More Conquests By The Arabs.—Part I.

The Two Sieges Of Constantinople By The Arabs.—Their Invasion Of
France, And Defeat By Charles Martel.—Civil War Of The Ommiades And
Abbassides.—Learning Of The Arabs.— Luxury Of The Caliphs.—Naval
Enterprises On Crete, Sicily, And Rome.—Decay And Division Of The
Empire Of The Caliphs. —Defeats And Victories Of The Greek Emperors.


Chapter LII: More Conquests By The Arabs.—Part II.

Chapter LII: More Conquests By The Arabs.—Part III.

Chapter LII: More Conquests By The Arabs.—Part IV.

Chapter LII: More Conquests By The Arabs.—Part V.

Chapter LIII: Fate Of The Eastern Empire.—Part I.

Fate Of The Eastern Empire In The Tenth Century.—Extent And
Division.—Wealth And Revenue.—Palace Of Constantinople.— Titles And
Offices.—Pride And Power Of The Emperors.— Tactics Of The Greeks,
Arabs, And Franks.—Loss Of The Latin Tongue.—Studies And Solitude Of
The Greeks.


Chapter LIII: Fate Of The Eastern Empire.—Part II.

Chapter LIII: Fate Of The Eastern Empire.—Part III.

Chapter LIII: Fate Of The Eastern Empire.—Part IV.

Chapter LIV: Origin And Doctrine Of The Paulicians.—Part I.

Origin And Doctrine Of The Paulicians.—Their Persecution By The Greek
Emperors.—Revolt In Armenia &c.—Transplantation Into
Thrace.—Propagation In The West.—The Seeds, Character, And Consequences
Of The Reformation.


Chapter LIV: Origin And Doctrine Of The Paulicians.—Part II.

Chapter LV: The Bulgarians, The Hungarians And The Russians.—Part I.

The Bulgarians.—Origin, Migrations, And Settlement Of The
Hungarians.—Their Inroads In The East And West.—The Monarchy Of
Russia.—Geography And Trade.—Wars Of The Russians Against The Greek
Empire.—Conversion Of The Barbarians.


Chapter LV: The Bulgarians, The Hungarians And The Russians.—Part II.

Chapter LV: The Bulgarians, The Hungarians And The Russians.—Part III.

Chapter LVI: The Saracens, The Franks And The Normans.—Part I.

The Saracens, Franks, And Greeks, In Italy.—First Adventures And
Settlement Of The Normans.—Character And Conquest Of Robert Guiscard,
Duke Of Apulia—Deliverance Of Sicily By His Brother Roger.—Victories Of
Robert Over The Emperors Of The East And West.—Roger, King Of Sicily,
Invades Africa And Greece.—The Emperor Manuel Comnenus.— Wars Of The
Greeks And Normans.—Extinction Of The Normans.


Chapter LVI: The Saracens, The Franks And The Normans.—Part II.

Chapter LVI: The Saracens, The Franks And The Normans.—Part III.

Chapter LVI: The Saracens, The Franks And The Normans.—Part IV.

Chapter LVI: The Saracens, The Franks And The Normans.—Part V.

Chapter LVII: The Turks.—Part I.

The Turks Of The House Of Seljuk.—Their Revolt Against Mahmud Conqueror
Of Hindostan.—Togrul Subdues Persia, And Protects The Caliphs.—Defeat
And Captivity Of The Emperor Romanus Diogenes By Alp Arslan.—Power And
Magnificence Of Malek Shah.—Conquest Of Asia Minor And Syria.—State And
Oppression Of Jerusalem.—Pilgrimages To The Holy Sepulchre.


Chapter LVII: The Turks.—Part II.

Chapter LVII: The Turks.—Part III.

Chapter LVIII: The First Crusade.—Part I.

Origin And Numbers Of The First Crusade.—Characters Of The Latin
Princes.—Their March To Constantinople.—Policy Of The Greek Emperor
Alexius.—Conquest Of Nice, Antioch, And Jerusalem, By The
Franks.—Deliverance Of The Holy Sepulchre.— Godfrey Of Bouillon, First
King Of Jerusalem.—Institutions Of The French Or Latin Kingdom.


Chapter LVIII: The First Crusade.—Part II.

Chapter LVIII: The First Crusade.—Part III.

Chapter LVIII: The First Crusade.—Part IV.

Chapter LVIII: The First Crusade.—Part V.

VOLUME SIX

Chapter LIX: The Crusades.—Part I.

Chapter LIX: The Crusades.—Part II.

Chapter LIX: The Crusades.—Part III.

Chapter LX: The Fourth Crusade.—Part I.

Chapter LX: The Fourth Crusade.—Part II.

Chapter LX: The Fourth Crusade.—Part III.

Chapter LXI: Partition Of The Empire By The French And Venetians.—Part
I.

Chapter LXI: Partition Of The Empire By The French And Venetians.—Part
II.

Chapter LXI: Partition Of The Empire By The French And Venetians.—Part
III.

Chapter LXI: Partition Of The Empire By The French And Venetians.—Part
IV.

Chapter LXII: Greek Emperors Of Nice And Constantinople.—Part I.

Chapter LXII: Greek Emperors Of Nice And Constantinople.—Part II.

Chapter LXII: Greek Emperors Of Nice And Constantinople.—Part III.

Chapter LXIII: Civil Wars And The Ruin Of The Greek Empire.—Part I.

Chapter LXIII: Civil Wars And The Ruin Of The Greek Empire.—Part II.

Chapter LXIV: Moguls, Ottoman Turks.—Part I.

Chapter LXIV: Moguls, Ottoman Turks.—Part II.

Chapter LXIV: Moguls, Ottoman Turks.—Part III.

Chapter LXIV: Moguls, Ottoman Turks.—Part IV.

Chapter LXV: Elevation Of Timour Or Tamerlane, And His Death.—Part I.

Chapter LXV: Elevation Of Timour Or Tamerlane, And His Death.—Part II.

Chapter LXV: Elevation Of Timour Or Tamerlane, And His Death.—Part III.

Chapter LXVI: Union Of The Greek And Latin Churches.—Part I.

Chapter LXVI: Union Of The Greek And Latin Churches.—Part II.

Chapter LXVI: Union Of The Greek And Latin Churches.—Part III.

Chapter LXVI: Union Of The Greek And Latin Churches.—Part IV.

Chapter LXVII: Schism Of The Greeks And Latins.—Part I.

Chapter LXVII: Schism Of The Greeks And Latins.—Part II.

Chapter LXVIII: Reign Of Mahomet The Second, Extinction Of Eastern
Empire.—Part I.

Chapter LXVIII: Reign Of Mahomet The Second, Extinction Of Eastern
Empire.—Part II.

Chapter LXVIII: Reign Of Mahomet The Second, Extinction Of Eastern
Empire.—Part III.

Chapter LXVIII: Reign Of Mahomet The Second, Extinction Of Eastern
Empire.—Part IV.

Chapter LXIX: State Of Rome From The Twelfth Century.—Part I.

Chapter LXIX: State Of Rome From The Twelfth Century.—Part II.

Chapter LXIX: State Of Rome From The Twelfth Century.—Part III.

Chapter LXIX: State Of Rome From The Twelfth Century.—Part IV.

Chapter LXX: Final Settlement Of The Ecclesiastical State.—Part I.

Chapter LXX: Final Settlement Of The Ecclesiastical State.—Part II.

Chapter LXX: Final Settlement Of The Ecclesiastical State.—Part III.

Chapter LXX: Final Settlement Of The Ecclesiastical State.—Part IV.

Chapter LXXI: Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth
Century.—Part I.

Chapter LXXI: Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth
Century.—Part II.




HISTORY OF THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE

Edward Gibbon, Esq.

With notes by the Rev. H. H. Milman

Vol. 1

1782 (Written), 1845 (Revised)


      Introduction


      Preface By The Editor.


      The great work of Gibbon is indispensable to the student of
      history. The literature of Europe offers no substitute for “The
      Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.” It has obtained undisputed
      possession, as rightful occupant, of the vast period which it
      comprehends. However some subjects, which it embraces, may have
      undergone more complete investigation, on the general view of the
      whole period, this history is the sole undisputed authority to
      which all defer, and from which few appeal to the original
      writers, or to more modern compilers. The inherent interest of
      the subject, the inexhaustible labor employed upon it; the
      immense condensation of matter; the luminous arrangement; the
      general accuracy; the style, which, however monotonous from its
      uniform stateliness, and sometimes wearisome from its elaborate
      ar., is throughout vigorous, animated, often picturesque, always
      commands attention, always conveys its meaning with emphatic
      energy, describes with singular breadth and fidelity, and
      generalizes with unrivalled felicity of expression; all these
      high qualifications have secured, and seem likely to secure, its
      permanent place in historic literature.


      This vast design of Gibbon, the magnificent whole into which he
      has cast the decay and ruin of the ancient civilization, the
      formation and birth of the new order of things, will of itself,
      independent of the laborious execution of his immense plan,
      render “The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire” an
      unapproachable subject to the future historian: 101 in the
      eloquent language of his recent French editor, M. Guizot:—


      101 (return) [ A considerable portion of this preface has already
      appeared before us public in the Quarterly Review.]


      “The gradual decline of the most extraordinary dominion which has
      ever invaded and oppressed the world; the fall of that immense
      empire, erected on the ruins of so many kingdoms, republics, and
      states both barbarous and civilized; and forming in its turn, by
      its dismemberment, a multitude of states, republics, and
      kingdoms; the annihilation of the religion of Greece and Rome;
      the birth and the progress of the two new religions which have
      shared the most beautiful regions of the earth; the decrepitude
      of the ancient world, the spectacle of its expiring glory and
      degenerate manners; the infancy of the modern world, the picture
      of its first progress, of the new direction given to the mind and
      character of man—such a subject must necessarily fix the
      attention and excite the interest of men, who cannot behold with
      indifference those memorable epochs, during which, in the fine
      language of Corneille—

     ‘Un grand destin commence, un grand destin s’achève.’”


      This extent and harmony of design is unquestionably that which
      distinguishes the work of Gibbon from all other great historical
      compositions. He has first bridged the abyss between ancient and
      modern times, and connected together the two great worlds of
      history. The great advantage which the classical historians
      possess over those of modern times is in unity of plan, of course
      greatly facilitated by the narrower sphere to which their
      researches were confined. Except Herodotus, the great historians
      of Greece—we exclude the more modern compilers, like Diodorus
      Siculus—limited themselves to a single period, or at ‘east to the
      contracted sphere of Grecian affairs. As far as the Barbarians
      trespassed within the Grecian boundary, or were necessarily
      mingled up with Grecian politics, they were admitted into the
      pale of Grecian history; but to Thucydides and to Xenophon,
      excepting in the Persian inroad of the latter, Greece was the
      world. Natural unity confined their narrative almost to
      chronological order, the episodes were of rare occurrence and
      extremely brief. To the Roman historians the course was equally
      clear and defined. Rome was their centre of unity; and the
      uniformity with which the circle of the Roman dominion spread
      around, the regularity with which their civil polity expanded,
      forced, as it were, upon the Roman historian that plan which
      Polybius announces as the subject of his history, the means and
      the manner by which the whole world became subject to the Roman
      sway. How different the complicated politics of the European
      kingdoms! Every national history, to be complete, must, in a
      certain sense, be the history of Europe; there is no knowing to
      how remote a quarter it may be necessary to trace our most
      domestic events; from a country, how apparently disconnected, may
      originate the impulse which gives its direction to the whole
      course of affairs.


      In imitation of his classical models, Gibbon places _Rome_ as the
      cardinal point from which his inquiries diverge, and to which
      they bear constant reference; yet how immeasurable the space over
      which those inquiries range! how complicated, how confused, how
      apparently inextricable the causes which tend to the decline of
      the Roman empire! how countless the nations which swarm forth, in
      mingling and indistinct hordes, constantly changing the
      geographical limits—incessantly confounding the natural
      boundaries! At first sight, the whole period, the whole state of
      the world, seems to offer no more secure footing to an historical
      adventurer than the chaos of Milton—to be in a state of
      irreclaimable disorder, best described in the language of the
      poet:—

     —“A dark
     Illimitable ocean, without bound,
     Without dimension, where length, breadth, and height,
     And time, and place, are lost: where eldest Night
     And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold
     Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise
     Of endless wars, and by confusion stand.”


      We feel that the unity and harmony of narrative, which shall
      comprehend this period of social disorganization, must be
      ascribed entirely to the skill and luminous disposition of the
      historian. It is in this sublime Gothic architecture of his work,
      in which the boundless range, the infinite variety, the, at first
      sight, incongruous gorgeousness of the separate parts,
      nevertheless are all subordinate to one main and predominant
      idea, that Gibbon is unrivalled. We cannot but admire the manner
      in which he masses his materials, and arranges his facts in
      successive groups, not according to chronological order, but to
      their moral or political connection; the distinctness with which
      he marks his periods of gradually increasing decay; and the skill
      with which, though advancing on separate parallels of history, he
      shows the common tendency of the slower or more rapid religious
      or civil innovations. However these principles of composition may
      demand more than ordinary attention on the part of the reader,
      they can alone impress upon the memory the real course, and the
      relative importance of the events. Whoever would justly
      appreciate the superiority of Gibbon’s lucid arrangement, should
      attempt to make his way through the regular but wearisome annals
      of Tillemont, or even the less ponderous volumes of Le Beau. Both
      these writers adhere, almost entirely, to chronological order;
      the consequence is, that we are twenty times called upon to break
      off, and resume the thread of six or eight wars in different
      parts of the empire; to suspend the operations of a military
      expedition for a court intrigue; to hurry away from a siege to a
      council; and the same page places us in the middle of a campaign
      against the barbarians, and in the depths of the Monophysite
      controversy. In Gibbon it is not always easy to bear in mind the
      exact dates but the course of events is ever clear and distinct;
      like a skilful general, though his troops advance from the most
      remote and opposite quarters, they are constantly bearing down
      and concentrating themselves on one point—that which is still
      occupied by the name, and by the waning power of Rome. Whether he
      traces the progress of hostile religions, or leads from the
      shores of the Baltic, or the verge of the Chinese empire, the
      successive hosts of barbarians—though one wave has hardly burst
      and discharged itself, before another swells up and
      approaches—all is made to flow in the same direction, and the
      impression which each makes upon the tottering fabric of the
      Roman greatness, connects their distant movements, and measures
      the relative importance assigned to them in the panoramic
      history. The more peaceful and didactic episodes on the
      development of the Roman law, or even on the details of
      ecclesiastical history, interpose themselves as resting-places or
      divisions between the periods of barbaric invasion. In short,
      though distracted first by the two capitals, and afterwards by
      the formal partition of the empire, the extraordinary felicity of
      arrangement maintains an order and a regular progression. As our
      horizon expands to reveal to us the gathering tempests which are
      forming far beyond the boundaries of the civilized world—as we
      follow their successive approach to the trembling frontier—the
      compressed and receding line is still distinctly visible; though
      gradually dismembered and the broken fragments assuming the form
      of regular states and kingdoms, the real relation of those
      kingdoms to the empire is maintained and defined; and even when
      the Roman dominion has shrunk into little more than the province
      of Thrace—when the name of Rome, confined, in Italy, to the walls
      of the city—yet it is still the memory, the shade of the Roman
      greatness, which extends over the wide sphere into which the
      historian expands his later narrative; the whole blends into the
      unity, and is manifestly essential to the double catastrophe of
      his tragic drama.


      But the amplitude, the magnificence, or the harmony of design,
      are, though imposing, yet unworthy claims on our admiration,
      unless the details are filled up with correctness and accuracy.
      No writer has been more severely tried on this point than Gibbon.
      He has undergone the triple scrutiny of theological zeal
      quickened by just resentment, of literary emulation, and of that
      mean and invidious vanity which delights in detecting errors in
      writers of established fame. On the result of the trial, we may
      be permitted to summon competent witnesses before we deliver our
      own judgment.


      M. Guizot, in his preface, after stating that in France and
      Germany, as well as in England, in the most enlightened countries
      of Europe, Gibbon is constantly cited as an authority, thus
      proceeds:—


      “I have had occasion, during my labors, to consult the writings
      of philosophers, who have treated on the finances of the Roman
      empire; of scholars, who have investigated the chronology; of
      theologians, who have searched the depths of ecclesiastical
      history; of writers on law, who have studied with care the Roman
      jurisprudence; of Orientalists, who have occupied themselves with
      the Arabians and the Koran; of modern historians, who have
      entered upon extensive researches touching the crusades and their
      influence; each of these writers has remarked and pointed out, in
      the ‘History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,’ some
      negligences, some false or imperfect views, some omissions, which
      it is impossible not to suppose voluntary; they have rectified
      some facts, combated with advantage some assertions; but in
      general they have taken the researches and the ideas of Gibbon,
      as points of departure, or as proofs of the researches or of the
      new opinions which they have advanced.”


      M. Guizot goes on to state his own impressions on reading
      Gibbon’s history, and no authority will have greater weight with
      those to whom the extent and accuracy of his historical
      researches are known:—


      “After a first rapid perusal, which allowed me to feel nothing
      but the interest of a narrative, always animated, and,
      notwithstanding its extent and the variety of objects which it
      makes to pass before the view, always perspicuous, I entered upon
      a minute examination of the details of which it was composed; and
      the opinion which I then formed was, I confess, singularly
      severe. I discovered, in certain chapters, errors which appeared
      to me sufficiently important and numerous to make me believe that
      they had been written with extreme negligence; in others, I was
      struck with a certain tinge of partiality and prejudice, which
      imparted to the exposition of the facts that want of truth and
      justice, which the English express by their happy term
      _misrepresentation_. Some imperfect (_tronquées_) quotations;
      some passages, omitted unintentionally or designedly cast a
      suspicion on the honesty (_bonne foi_) of the author; and his
      violation of the first law of history—increased to my eye by the
      prolonged attention with which I occupied myself with every
      phrase, every note, every reflection—caused me to form upon the
      whole work, a judgment far too rigorous. After having finished my
      labors, I allowed some time to elapse before I reviewed the
      whole. A second attentive and regular perusal of the entire work,
      of the notes of the author, and of those which I had thought it
      right to subjoin, showed me how much I had exaggerated the
      importance of the reproaches which Gibbon really deserved; I was
      struck with the same errors, the same partiality on certain
      subjects; but I had been far from doing adequate justice to the
      immensity of his researches, the variety of his knowledge, and
      above all, to that truly philosophical discrimination (_justesse
      d’esprit_) which judges the past as it would judge the present;
      which does not permit itself to be blinded by the clouds which
      time gathers around the dead, and which prevent us from seeing
      that, under the toga, as under the modern dress, in the senate as
      in our councils, men were what they still are, and that events
      took place eighteen centuries ago, as they take place in our
      days. I then felt that his book, in spite of its faults, will
      always be a noble work—and that we may correct his errors and
      combat his prejudices, without ceasing to admit that few men have
      combined, if we are not to say in so high a degree, at least in a
      manner so complete, and so well regulated, the necessary
      qualifications for a writer of history.”


      The present editor has followed the track of Gibbon through many
      parts of his work; he has read his authorities with constant
      reference to his pages, and must pronounce his deliberate
      judgment, in terms of the highest admiration as to his general
      accuracy. Many of his seeming errors are almost inevitable from
      the close condensation of his matter. From the immense range of
      his history, it was sometimes necessary to compress into a single
      sentence, a whole vague and diffuse page of a Byzantine
      chronicler. Perhaps something of importance may have thus
      escaped, and his expressions may not quite contain the whole
      substance of the passage from which they are taken. His limits,
      at times, compel him to sketch; where that is the case, it is not
      fair to expect the full details of the finished picture. At times
      he can only deal with important results; and in his account of a
      war, it sometimes requires great attention to discover that the
      events which seem to be comprehended in a single campaign, occupy
      several years. But this admirable skill in selecting and giving
      prominence to the points which are of real weight and
      importance—this distribution of light and shade—though perhaps it
      may occasionally betray him into vague and imperfect statements,
      is one of the highest excellencies of Gibbon’s historic manner.
      It is the more striking, when we pass from the works of his chief
      authorities, where, after laboring through long, minute, and
      wearisome descriptions of the accessary and subordinate
      circumstances, a single unmarked and undistinguished sentence,
      which we may overlook from the inattention of fatigue, contains
      the great moral and political result.


      Gibbon’s method of arrangement, though on the whole most
      favorable to the clear comprehension of the events, leads
      likewise to apparent inaccuracy. That which we expect to find in
      one part is reserved for another. The estimate which we are to
      form, depends on the accurate balance of statements in remote
      parts of the work; and we have sometimes to correct and modify
      opinions, formed from one chapter by those of another. Yet, on
      the other hand, it is astonishing how rarely we detect
      contradiction; the mind of the author has already harmonized the
      whole result to truth and probability; the general impression is
      almost invariably the same. The quotations of Gibbon have
      likewise been called in question;—I have, _in general_, been more
      inclined to admire their exactitude, than to complain of their
      indistinctness, or incompleteness. Where they are imperfect, it
      is commonly from the study of brevity, and rather from the desire
      of compressing the substance of his notes into pointed and
      emphatic sentences, than from dishonesty, or uncandid suppression
      of truth.


      These observations apply more particularly to the accuracy and
      fidelity of the historian as to his facts; his inferences, of
      course, are more liable to exception. It is almost impossible to
      trace the line between unfairness and unfaithfulness; between
      intentional misrepresentation and undesigned false coloring. The
      relative magnitude and importance of events must, in some
      respect, depend upon the mind before which they are presented;
      the estimate of character, on the habits and feelings of the
      reader. Christians, like M. Guizot and ourselves, will see some
      things, and some persons, in a different light from the historian
      of the Decline and Fall. We may deplore the bias of his mind; we
      may ourselves be on our guard against the danger of being misled,
      and be anxious to warn less wary readers against the same perils;
      but we must not confound this secret and unconscious departure
      from truth, with the deliberate violation of that veracity which
      is the only title of an historian to our confidence. Gibbon, it
      may be fearlessly asserted, is rarely chargeable even with the
      suppression of any material fact, which bears upon individual
      character; he may, with apparently invidious hostility, enhance
      the errors and crimes, and disparage the virtues of certain
      persons; yet, in general, he leaves us the materials for forming
      a fairer judgment; and if he is not exempt from his own
      prejudices, perhaps we might write _passions_, yet it must be
      candidly acknowledged, that his philosophical bigotry is not more
      unjust than the theological partialities of those ecclesiastical
      writers who were before in undisputed possession of this province
      of history.


      We are thus naturally led to that great misrepresentation which
      pervades his history—his false estimate of the nature and
      influence of Christianity.


      But on this subject some preliminary caution is necessary, lest
      that should be expected from a new edition, which it is
      impossible that it should completely accomplish. We must first be
      prepared with the only sound preservative against the false
      impression likely to be produced by the perusal of Gibbon; and we
      must see clearly the real cause of that false impression. The
      former of these cautions will be briefly suggested in its proper
      place, but it may be as well to state it, here, somewhat more at
      length. The art of Gibbon, or at least the unfair impression
      produced by his two memorable chapters, consists in his
      confounding together, in one indistinguishable mass, the _origin_
      and _apostolic_ propagation of the new religion, with its _later_
      progress. No argument for the divine authority of Christianity
      has been urged with greater force, or traced with higher
      eloquence, than that deduced from its primary development,
      explicable on no other hypothesis than a heavenly origin, and
      from its rapid extension through great part of the Roman empire.
      But this argument—one, when confined within reasonable limits, of
      unanswerable force—becomes more feeble and disputable in
      proportion as it recedes from the birthplace, as it were, of the
      religion. The further Christianity advanced, the more causes
      purely human were enlisted in its favor; nor can it be doubted
      that those developed with such artful exclusiveness by Gibbon did
      concur most essentially to its establishment. It is in the
      Christian dispensation, as in the material world. In both it is
      as the great First Cause, that the Deity is most undeniably
      manifest. When once launched in regular motion upon the bosom of
      space, and endowed with all their properties and relations of
      weight and mutual attraction, the heavenly bodies appear to
      pursue their courses according to secondary laws, which account
      for all their sublime regularity. So Christianity proclaims its
      Divine Author chiefly in its first origin and development. When
      it had once received its impulse from above—when it had once been
      infused into the minds of its first teachers—when it had gained
      full possession of the reason and affections of the favored
      few—it _might be_—and to the Protestant, the rationa Christian,
      it is impossible to define _when_ it really _was_—left to make
      its way by its native force, under the ordinary secret agencies
      of all-ruling Providence. The main question, the _divine origin
      of the religion_, was dexterously eluded, or speciously conceded
      by Gibbon; his plan enabled him to commence his account, in most
      parts, _below the apostolic times;_ and it was only by the
      strength of the dark coloring with which he brought out the
      failings and the follies of the succeeding ages, that a shadow of
      doubt and suspicion was thrown back upon the primitive period of
      Christianity.


      “The theologian,” says Gibbon, “may indulge the pleasing task of
      describing religion as she descended from heaven, arrayed in her
      native purity; a more melancholy duty is imposed upon the
      historian:—he must discover the inevitable mixture of error and
      corruption which she contracted in a long residence upon earth
      among a weak and degenerate race of beings.” Divest this passage
      of the latent sarcasm betrayed by the subsequent tone of the
      whole disquisition, and it might commence a Christian history
      written in the most Christian spirit of candor. But as the
      historian, by seeming to respect, yet by dexterously confounding
      the limits of the sacred land, contrived to insinuate that it was
      an Utopia which had no existence but in the imagination of the
      theologian—as he _suggested_ rather than affirmed that the days
      of Christian purity were a kind of poetic golden age;—so the
      theologian, by venturing too far into the domain of the
      historian, has been perpetually obliged to contest points on
      which he had little chance of victory—to deny facts established
      on unshaken evidence—and thence, to retire, if not with the shame
      of defeat, yet with but doubtful and imperfect success. Paley,
      with his intuitive sagacity, saw through the difficulty of
      answering Gibbon by the ordinary arts of controversy; his
      emphatic sentence, “Who can refute a sneer?” contains as much
      truth as point. But full and pregnant as this phrase is, it is
      not quite the whole truth; it is the tone in which the progress
      of Christianity is traced, in _comparison_ with the rest of the
      splendid and prodigally ornamented work, which is the radical
      defect in the “Decline and Fall.” Christianity alone receives no
      embellishment from the magic of Gibbon’s language; his
      imagination is dead to its moral dignity; it is kept down by a
      general zone of jealous disparagement, or neutralized by a
      painfully elaborate exposition of its darker and degenerate
      periods. There are occasions, indeed, when its pure and exalted
      humanity, when its manifestly beneficial influence, can compel
      even him, as it were, to fairness, and kindle his unguarded
      eloquence to its usual fervor; but, in general, he soon relapses
      into a frigid apathy; _affects_ an ostentatiously severe
      impartiality; notes all the faults of Christians in every age
      with bitter and almost malignant sarcasm; reluctantly, and with
      exception and reservation, admits their claim to admiration. This
      inextricable bias appears even to influence his manner of
      composition. While all the other assailants of the Roman empire,
      whether warlike or religious, the Goth, the Hun, the Arab, the
      Tartar, Alaric and Attila, Mahomet, and Zengis, and Tamerlane,
      are each introduced upon the scene almost with dramatic
      animation—their progress related in a full, complete, and
      unbroken narrative—the triumph of Christianity alone takes the
      form of a cold and critical disquisition. The successes of
      barbarous energy and brute force call forth all the consummate
      skill of composition; while the moral triumphs of Christian
      benevolence—the tranquil heroism of endurance, the blameless
      purity, the contempt of guilty fame and of honors destructive to
      the human race, which, had they assumed the proud name of
      philosophy, would have been blazoned in his brightest words,
      because they own religion as their principle—sink into narrow
      asceticism. The _glories_ of Christianity, in short, touch on no
      chord in the heart of the writer; his imagination remains
      unkindled; his words, though they maintain their stately and
      measured march, have become cool, argumentative, and inanimate.
      Who would obscure one hue of that gorgeous coloring in which
      Gibbon has invested the dying forms of Paganism, or darken one
      paragraph in his splendid view of the rise and progress of
      Mahometanism? But who would not have wished that the same equal
      justice had been done to Christianity; that its real character
      and deeply penetrating influence had been traced with the same
      philosophical sagacity, and represented with more sober, as would
      become its quiet course, and perhaps less picturesque, but still
      with lively and attractive, descriptiveness? He might have thrown
      aside, with the same scorn, the mass of ecclesiastical fiction
      which envelops the early history of the church, stripped off the
      legendary romance, and brought out the facts in their primitive
      nakedness and simplicity—if he had but allowed those facts the
      benefit of the glowing eloquence which he denied to them alone.
      He might have annihilated the whole fabric of post-apostolic
      miracles, if he had left uninjured by sarcastic insinuation those
      of the New Testament; he might have cashiered, with Dodwell, the
      whole host of martyrs, which owe their existence to the prodigal
      invention of later days, had he but bestowed fair room, and dwelt
      with his ordinary energy on the sufferings of the genuine
      witnesses to the truth of Christianity, the Polycarps, or the
      martyrs of Vienne. And indeed, if, after all, the view of the
      early progress of Christianity be melancholy and humiliating we
      must beware lest we charge the whole of this on the infidelity of
      the historian. It is idle, it is disingenuous, to deny or to
      dissemble the early depravations of Christianity, its gradual but
      rapid departure from its primitive simplicity and purity, still
      more, from its spirit of universal love. It may be no unsalutary
      lesson to the Christian world, that this silent, this
      unavoidable, perhaps, yet fatal change shall have been drawn by
      an impartial, or even an hostile hand. The Christianity of every
      age may take warning, lest by its own narrow views, its want of
      wisdom, and its want of charity, it give the same advantage to
      the future unfriendly historian, and disparage the cause of true
      religion.


      The design of the present edition is partly corrective, partly
      supplementary: corrective, by notes, which point out (it is
      hoped, in a perfectly candid and dispassionate spirit with no
      desire but to establish the truth) such inaccuracies or
      misstatements as may have been detected, particularly with regard
      to Christianity; and which thus, with the previous caution, may
      counteract to a considerable extent the unfair and unfavorable
      impression created against rational religion: supplementary, by
      adding such additional information as the editor’s reading may
      have been able to furnish, from original documents or books, not
      accessible at the time when Gibbon wrote.


      The work originated in the editor’s habit of noting on the margin
      of his copy of Gibbon references to such authors as had
      discovered errors, or thrown new light on the subjects treated by
      Gibbon. These had grown to some extent, and seemed to him likely
      to be of use to others. The annotations of M. Guizot also
      appeared to him worthy of being better known to the English
      public than they were likely to be, as appended to the French
      translation.


      The chief works from which the editor has derived his materials
      are, I. The French translation, with notes by M. Guizot; 2d
      edition, Paris, 1828. The editor has translated almost all the
      notes of M. Guizot. Where he has not altogether agreed with him,
      his respect for the learning and judgment of that writer has, in
      general, induced him to retain the statement from which he has
      ventured to differ, with the grounds on which he formed his own
      opinion. In the notes on Christianity, he has retained all those
      of M. Guizot, with his own, from the conviction, that on such a
      subject, to many, the authority of a French statesman, a
      Protestant, and a rational and sincere Christian, would appear
      more independent and unbiassed, and therefore be more commanding,
      than that of an English clergyman.
