

      46 (return) [ In the camp of Lucullus, an ox sold for a drachma,
      and a slave for four drachmæ, or about three shillings. Plutarch.
      in Lucull. p. 580. * Note: Above 100,000 prisoners were taken in
      the Jewish war.—G. Hist. of Jews, iii. 71. According to a
      tradition preserved by S. Jerom, after the insurrection in the
      time of Hadrian, they were sold as cheap as horse. Ibid. 124.
      Compare Blair on Roman Slavery, p. 19.—M., and Dureau de la
      blalle, Economie Politique des Romains, l. i. c. 15. But I cannot
      think that this writer has made out his case as to the common
      price of an agricultural slave being from 2000 to 2500 francs,
      (80l. to 100l.) He has overlooked the passages which show the
      ordinary prices, (i. e. Hor. Sat. ii. vii. 45,) and argued from
      extraordinary and exceptional cases.—M. 1845.]


      47 (return) [ Diodorus Siculus in Eclog. Hist. l. xxxiv. and
      xxxvi. Florus, iii. 19, 20.]


      471 (return) [ The following is the example: we shall see whether
      the word “severe” is here in its place. “At the time in which L.
      Domitius was prætor in Sicily, a slave killed a wild boar of
      extraordinary size. The prætor, struck by the dexterity and
      courage of the man, desired to see him. The poor wretch, highly
      gratified with the distinction, came to present himself before
      the prætor, in hopes, no doubt, of praise and reward; but
      Domitius, on learning that he had only a javelin to attack and
      kill the boar, ordered him to be instantly crucified, under the
      barbarous pretext that the law prohibited the use of this weapon,
      as of all others, to slaves.” Perhaps the cruelty of Domitius is
      less astonishing than the indifference with which the Roman
      orator relates this circumstance, which affects him so little
      that he thus expresses himself: “Durum hoc fortasse videatur,
      neque ego in ullam partem disputo.” “This may appear harsh, nor
      do I give any opinion on the subject.” And it is the same orator
      who exclaims in the same oration, “Facinus est cruciare civem
      Romanum; scelus verberare; prope parricidium necare: quid dicam
      in crucem tollere?” “It is a crime to imprison a Roman citizen;
      wickedness to scourge; next to parricide to put to death, what
      shall I call it to crucify?”


      In general, this passage of Gibbon on slavery, is full, not only
      of blamable indifference, but of an exaggeration of impartiality
      which resembles dishonesty. He endeavors to extenuate all that is
      appalling in the condition and treatment of the slaves; he would
      make us consider those cruelties as possibly “justified by
      necessity.” He then describes, with minute accuracy, the
      slightest mitigations of their deplorable condition; he
      attributes to the virtue or the policy of the emperors the
      progressive amelioration in the lot of the slaves; and he passes
      over in silence the most influential cause, that which, after
      rendering the slaves less miserable, has contributed at length
      entirely to enfranchise them from their sufferings and their
      chains,—Christianity. It would be easy to accumulate the most
      frightful, the most agonizing details, of the manner in which the
      Romans treated their slaves; whole works have been devoted to the
      description. I content myself with referring to them. Some
      reflections of Robertson, taken from the discourse already
      quoted, will make us feel that Gibbon, in tracing the mitigation
      of the condition of the slaves, up to a period little later than
      that which witnessed the establishment of Christianity in the
      world, could not have avoided the acknowledgment of the influence
      of that beneficent cause, if he had not already determined not to
      speak of it.


      “Upon establishing despotic government in the Roman empire,
      domestic tyranny rose, in a short time, to an astonishing height.
      In that rank soil, every vice, which power nourishes in the
      great, or oppression engenders in the mean, thrived and grew up
      apace. * * * It is not the authority of any single detached
      precept in the gospel, but the spirit and genius of the Christian
      religion, more powerful than any particular command, which hath
      abolished the practice of slavery throughout the world. The
      temper which Christianity inspired was mild and gentle; and the
      doctrines it taught added such dignity and lustre to human
      nature, as rescued it from the dishonorable servitude into which
      it was sunk.”


      It is in vain, then, that Gibbon pretends to attribute solely to
      the desire of keeping up the number of slaves, the milder conduct
      which the Romans began to adopt in their favor at the time of the
      emperors. This cause had hitherto acted in an opposite direction;
      how came it on a sudden to have a different influence? “The
      masters,” he says, “encouraged the marriage of their slaves; * *
      * the sentiments of nature, the habits of education, contributed
      to alleviate the hardships of servitude.” The children of slaves
      were the property of their master, who could dispose of or
      alienate them like the rest of his property. Is it in such a
      situation, with such notions, that the sentiments of nature
      unfold themselves, or habits of education become mild and
      peaceful? We must not attribute to causes inadequate or
      altogether without force, effects which require to explain them a
      reference to more influential causes; and even if these slighter
      causes had in effect a manifest influence, we must not forget
      that they are themselves the effect of a primary, a higher, and
      more extensive cause, which, in giving to the mind and to the
      character a more disinterested and more humane bias, disposed men
      to second or themselves to advance, by their conduct, and by the
      change of manners, the happy results which it tended to
      produce.—G.


      I have retained the whole of M. Guizot’s note, though, in his
      zeal for the invaluable blessings of freedom and Christianity, he
      has done Gibbon injustice. The condition of the slaves was
      undoubtedly improved under the emperors. What a great authority
      has said, “The condition of a slave is better under an arbitrary
      than under a free government,” (Smith’s Wealth of Nations, iv.
      7,) is, I believe, supported by the history of all ages and
      nations. The protecting edicts of Hadrian and the Antonines are
      historical facts, and can as little be attributed to the
      influence of Christianity, as the milder language of heathen
      writers, of Seneca, (particularly Ep. 47,) of Pliny, and of
      Plutarch. The latter influence of Christianity is admitted by
      Gibbon himself. The subject of Roman slavery has recently been
      investigated with great diligence in a very modest but valuable
      volume, by Wm. Blair, Esq., Edin. 1833. May we be permitted,
      while on the subject, to refer to the most splendid passage
      extant of Mr. Pitt’s eloquence, the description of the Roman
      slave-dealer. on the shores of Britain, condemning the island to
      irreclaimable barbarism, as a perpetual and prolific nursery of
      slaves? Speeches, vol. ii. p. 80.


      Gibbon, it should be added, was one of the first and most
      consistent opponents of the African slave-trade. (See Hist. ch.
      xxv. and Letters to Lor Sheffield, Misc. Works)—M.]


      48 (return) [ See a remarkable instance of severity in Cicero in
      Verrem, v. 3.]


      481 (return) [ An active slave-trade, which was carried on in
      many quarters, particularly the Euxine, the eastern provinces,
      the coast of Africa, and British must be taken into the account.
      Blair, 23—32.—M.]


      482 (return) [ The Romans, as well in the first ages of the
      republic as later, allowed to their slaves a kind of marriage,
      (contubernium: ) notwithstanding this, luxury made a greater
      number of slaves in demand. The increase in their population was
      not sufficient, and recourse was had to the purchase of slaves,
      which was made even in the provinces of the East subject to the
      Romans. It is, moreover, known that slavery is a state little
      favorable to population. (See Hume’s Essay, and Malthus on
      population, i. 334.—G.) The testimony of Appian (B.C. l. i. c. 7)
      is decisive in favor of the rapid multiplication of the
      agricultural slaves; it is confirmed by the numbers engaged in
      the servile wars. Compare also Blair, p. 119; likewise Columella
      l. viii.—M.]


      49 (return) [ See in Gruter, and the other collectors, a great
      number of inscriptions addressed by slaves to their wives,
      children, fellow-servants, masters, &c. They are all most
      probably of the Imperial age.]


      50 (return) [ See the Augustan History, and a Dissertation of M.
      de Burigny, in the xxxvth volume of the Academy of Inscriptions,
      upon the Roman slaves.]


      Hope, the best comfort of our imperfect condition, was not denied
      to the Roman slave; and if he had any opportunity of rendering
      himself either useful or agreeable, he might very naturally
      expect that the diligence and fidelity of a few years would be
      rewarded with the inestimable gift of freedom. The benevolence of
      the master was so frequently prompted by the meaner suggestions
      of vanity and avarice, that the laws found it more necessary to
      restrain than to encourage a profuse and undistinguishing
      liberality, which might degenerate into a very dangerous abuse.
      51 It was a maxim of ancient jurisprudence, that a slave had not
      any country of his own; he acquired with his liberty an admission
      into the political society of which his patron was a member. The
      consequences of this maxim would have prostituted the privileges
      of the Roman city to a mean and promiscuous multitude. Some
      seasonable exceptions were therefore provided; and the honorable
      distinction was confined to such slaves only as, for just causes,
      and with the approbation of the magistrate, should receive a
      solemn and legal manumission. Even these chosen freedmen obtained
      no more than the private rights of citizens, and were rigorously
      excluded from civil or military honors. Whatever might be the
      merit or fortune of their sons, _they_ likewise were esteemed
      unworthy of a seat in the senate; nor were the traces of a
      servile origin allowed to be completely obliterated till the
      third or fourth generation. 52 Without destroying the distinction
      of ranks, a distant prospect of freedom and honors was presented,
      even to those whom pride and prejudice almost disdained to number
      among the human species.


      51 (return) [ See another Dissertation of M. de Burigny, in the
      xxxviith volume, on the Roman freedmen.]


      52 (return) [ Spanheim, Orbis Roman. l. i. c. 16, p. 124, &c.] It
      was once proposed to discriminate the slaves by a peculiar habit;
      but it was justly apprehended that there might be some danger in
      acquainting them with their own numbers. 53 Without interpreting,
      in their utmost strictness, the liberal appellations of legions
      and myriads, 54 we may venture to pronounce, that the proportion
      of slaves, who were valued as property, was more considerable
      than that of servants, who can be computed only as an expense. 55
      The youths of a promising genius were instructed in the arts and
      sciences, and their price was ascertained by the degree of their
      skill and talents. 56 Almost every profession, either liberal 57
      or mechanical, might be found in the household of an opulent
      senator. The ministers of pomp and sensuality were multiplied
      beyond the conception of modern luxury. 58 It was more for the
      interest of the merchant or manufacturer to purchase, than to
      hire his workmen; and in the country, slaves were employed as the
      cheapest and most laborious instruments of agriculture. To
      confirm the general observation, and to display the multitude of
      slaves, we might allege a variety of particular instances. It was
      discovered, on a very melancholy occasion, that four hundred
      slaves were maintained in a single palace of Rome. 59 The same
      number of four hundred belonged to an estate which an African
      widow, of a very private condition, resigned to her son, whilst
      she reserved for herself a much larger share of her property. 60
      A freedman, under the name of Augustus, though his fortune had
      suffered great losses in the civil wars, left behind him three
      thousand six hundred yoke of oxen, two hundred and fifty thousand
      head of smaller cattle, and what was almost included in the
      description of cattle, four thousand one hundred and sixteen
      slaves. 61


      53 (return) [ Seneca de Clementia, l. i. c. 24. The original is
      much stronger, “Quantum periculum immineret si servi nostri
      numerare nos cœpissent.”]


      54 (return) [ See Pliny (Hist. Natur. l. xxxiii.) and Athenæus
      (Deipnosophist. l. vi. p. 272.) The latter boldly asserts, that
      he knew very many Romans who possessed, not for use, but
      ostentation, ten and even twenty thousand slaves.]


      55 (return) [ In Paris there are not more than 43,000 domestics
      of every sort, and not a twelfth part of the inhabitants.
      Messange, Recherches sui la Population, p. 186.]


      56 (return) [ A learned slave sold for many hundred pounds
      sterling: Atticus always bred and taught them himself. Cornel.
      Nepos in Vit. c. 13, [on the prices of slaves. Blair, 149.]—M.]


      57 (return) [ Many of the Roman physicians were slaves. See Dr.
      Middleton’s Dissertation and Defence.]


      58 (return) [ Their ranks and offices are very copiously
      enumerated by Pignorius de Servis.]


      59 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xiv. 43. They were all executed for
      not preventing their master’s murder. * Note: The remarkable
      speech of Cassius shows the proud feelings of the Roman
      aristocracy on this subject.—M]


      60 (return) [ Apuleius in Apolog. p. 548. edit. Delphin]


      61 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xxxiii. 47.]


      The number of subjects who acknowledged the laws of Rome, of
      citizens, of provincials, and of slaves, cannot now be fixed with
      such a degree of accuracy, as the importance of the object would
      deserve. We are informed, that when the Emperor Claudius
      exercised the office of censor, he took an account of six
      millions nine hundred and forty-five thousand Roman citizens,
      who, with the proportion of women and children, must have
      amounted to about twenty millions of souls. The multitude of
      subjects of an inferior rank was uncertain and fluctuating. But,
      after weighing with attention every circumstance which could
      influence the balance, it seems probable that there existed, in
      the time of Claudius, about twice as many provincials as there
      were citizens, of either sex, and of every age; and that the
      slaves were at least equal in number to the free inhabitants of
      the Roman world.611 The total amount of this imperfect
      calculation would rise to about one hundred and twenty millions
      of persons; a degree of population which possibly exceeds that of
      modern Europe, 62 and forms the most numerous society that has
      ever been united under the same system of government.


      611] ( return)
      [ According to Robertson, there were twice as many slaves as free
      citizens.—G. Mr. Blair (p. 15) estimates three slaves to one
      freeman, between the conquest of Greece, B.C. 146, and the reign
      of Alexander Severus, A. D. 222, 235. The proportion was probably
      larger in Italy than in the provinces.—M. On the other hand,
      Zumpt, in his Dissertation quoted below, (p. 86,) asserts it to
      be a gross error in Gibbon to reckon the number of slaves equal
      to that of the free population. The luxury and magnificence of
      the great, (he observes,) at the commencement of the empire, must
      not be taken as the groundwork of calculations for the whole
      Roman world. “The agricultural laborer, and the artisan, in
      Spain, Gaul, Britain, Syria, and Egypt, maintained himself, as in
      the present day, by his own labor and that of his household,
      without possessing a single slave.” The latter part of my note
      was intended to suggest this consideration. Yet so completely was
      slavery rooted in the social system, both in the east and the
      west, that in the great diffusion of wealth at this time, every
      one, I doubt not, who could afford a domestic slave, kept one;
      and generally, the number of slaves was in proportion to the
      wealth. I do not believe that the cultivation of the soil by
      slaves was confined to Italy; the holders of large estates in the
      provinces would probably, either from choice or necessity, adopt
      the same mode of cultivation. The latifundia, says Pliny, had
      ruined Italy, and had begun to ruin the provinces. Slaves were no
      doubt employed in agricultural labor to a great extent in Sicily,
      and were the estates of those six enormous landholders who were
      said to have possessed the whole province of Africa, cultivated
      altogether by free coloni? Whatever may have been the case in the
      rural districts, in the towns and cities the household duties
      were almost entirely discharged by slaves, and vast numbers
      belonged to the public establishments. I do not, however, differ
      so far from Zumpt, and from M. Dureau de la Malle, as to adopt
      the higher and bolder estimate of Robertson and Mr. Blair, rather
      than the more cautious suggestions of Gibbon. I would reduce
      rather than increase the proportion of the slave population. The
      very ingenious and elaborate calculations of the French writer,
      by which he deduces the amount of the population from the produce
      and consumption of corn in Italy, appear to me neither precise
      nor satisfactory bases for such complicated political arithmetic.
      I am least satisfied with his views as to the population of the
      city of Rome; but this point will be more fitly reserved for a
      note on the thirty-first chapter of Gibbon. The work, however, of
      M. Dureau de la Malle is very curious and full on some of the
      minuter points of Roman statistics.—M. 1845.]


      62 (return) [ Compute twenty millions in France, twenty-two in
      Germany, four in Hungary, ten in Italy with its islands, eight in
      Great Britain and Ireland, eight in Spain and Portugal, ten or
      twelve in the European Russia, six in Poland, six in Greece and
      Turkey, four in Sweden, three in Denmark and Norway, four in the
      Low Countries. The whole would amount to one hundred and five, or
      one hundred and seven millions. See Voltaire, de l’Histoire
      Generale. * Note: The present population of Europe is estimated
      at 227,700,000. Malts Bran, Geogr. Trans edit. 1832 See details
      in the different volumes Another authority, (Almanach de Gotha,)
      quoted in a recent English publication, gives the following
      details:—


      France, 32,897,521 Germany, (including Hungary, Prussian and
      Austrian Poland,) 56,136,213 Italy, 20,548,616 Great Britain and
      Ireland, 24,062,947 Spain and Portugal, 13,953,959. 3,144,000
      Russia, including Poland, 44,220,600 Cracow, 128,480 Turkey,
      (including Pachalic of Dschesair,) 9,545,300 Greece, 637,700
      Ionian Islands, 208,100 Sweden and Norway, 3,914,963 Denmark,
      2,012,998 Belgium, 3,533,538 Holland, 2,444,550 Switzerland,
      985,000. Total, 219,344,116


      Since the publication of my first annotated edition of Gibbon,
      the subject of the population of the Roman empire has been
      investigated by two writers of great industry and learning; Mons.
      Dureau de la Malle, in his Economie Politique des Romains, liv.
      ii. c. 1. to 8, and M. Zumpt, in a dissertation printed in the
      Transactions of the Berlin Academy, 1840. M. Dureau de la Malle
      confines his inquiry almost entirely to the city of Rome, and
      Roman Italy. Zumpt examines at greater length the axiom, which he
      supposes to have been assumed by Gibbon as unquestionable, “that
      Italy and the Roman world was never so populous as in the time of
      the Antonines.” Though this probably was Gibbon’s opinion, he has
      not stated it so peremptorily as asserted by Mr. Zumpt. It had
      before been expressly laid down by Hume, and his statement was
      controverted by Wallace and by Malthus. Gibbon says (p. 84) that
      there is no reason to believe the country (of Italy) less
      populous in the age of the Antonines, than in that of Romulus;
      and Zumpt acknowledges that we have no satisfactory knowledge of
      the state of Italy at that early age. Zumpt, in my opinion with
      some reason, takes the period just before the first Punic war, as
      that in which Roman Italy (all south of the Rubicon) was most
      populous. From that time, the numbers began to diminish, at first
      from the enormous waste of life out of the free population in the
      foreign, and afterwards in the civil wars; from the cultivation
      of the soil by slaves; towards the close of the republic, from
      the repugnance to marriage, which resisted alike the dread of
      legal punishment and the offer of legal immunity and privilege;
      and from the depravity of manners, which interfered with the
      procreation, the birth, and the rearing of children. The
      arguments and the authorities of Zumpt are equally conclusive as
      to the decline of population in Greece. Still the details, which
      he himself adduces as to the prosperity and populousness of Asia
      Minor, and the whole of the Roman East, with the advancement of
      the European provinces, especially Gaul, Spain, and Britain, in
      civilization, and therefore in populousness, (for I have no
      confidence in the vast numbers sometimes assigned to the
      barbarous inhabitants of these countries,) may, I think, fairly
      compensate for any deduction to be made from Gibbon’s general
      estimate on account of Greece and Italy. Gibbon himself
      acknowledges his own estimate to be vague and conjectural; and I
      may venture to recommend the dissertation of Zumpt as deserving
      respectful consideration.—M 1815.]


      Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The
      Antonines.—Part III.


      Domestic peace and union were the natural consequences of the
      moderate and comprehensive policy embraced by the Romans. If we
      turn our eyes towards the monarchies of Asia, we shall behold
      despotism in the centre, and weakness in the extremities; the
      collection of the revenue, or the administration of justice,
      enforced by the presence of an army; hostile barbarians
      established in the heart of the country, hereditary satraps
      usurping the dominion of the provinces, and subjects inclined to
      rebellion, though incapable of freedom. But the obedience of the
      Roman world was uniform, voluntary, and permanent. The vanquished
      nations, blended into one great people, resigned the hope, nay,
      even the wish, of resuming their independence, and scarcely
      considered their own existence as distinct from the existence of
      Rome. The established authority of the emperors pervaded without
      an effort the wide extent of their dominions, and was exercised
      with the same facility on the banks of the Thames, or of the
      Nile, as on those of the Tyber. The legions were destined to
      serve against the public enemy, and the civil magistrate seldom
      required the aid of a military force. 63 In this state of general
      security, the leisure, as well as opulence, both of the prince
      and people, were devoted to improve and to adorn the Roman
      empire.


      63 (return) [ Joseph. de Bell. Judaico, l. ii. c. 16. The oration
      of Agrippa, or rather of the historian, is a fine picture of the
      Roman empire.]


      Among the innumerable monuments of architecture constructed by
      the Romans, how many have escaped the notice of history, how few
      have resisted the ravages of time and barbarism! And yet, even
      the majestic ruins that are still scattered over Italy and the
      provinces, would be sufficient to prove that those countries were
      once the seat of a polite and powerful empire. Their greatness
      alone, or their beauty, might deserve our attention: but they are
      rendered more interesting, by two important circumstances, which
      connect the agreeable history of the arts with the more useful
      history of human manners. Many of those works were erected at
      private expense, and almost all were intended for public benefit.


      It is natural to suppose that the greatest number, as well as the
      most considerable of the Roman edifices, were raised by the
      emperors, who possessed so unbounded a command both of men and
      money. Augustus was accustomed to boast that he had found his
      capital of brick, and that he had left it of marble. 64 The
      strict economy of Vespasian was the source of his magnificence.
      The works of Trajan bear the stamp of his genius. The public
      monuments with which Hadrian adorned every province of the
      empire, were executed not only by his orders, but under his
      immediate inspection. He was himself an artist; and he loved the
      arts, as they conduced to the glory of the monarch. They were
      encouraged by the Antonines, as they contributed to the happiness
      of the people. But if the emperors were the first, they were not
      the only architects of their dominions. Their example was
      universally imitated by their principal subjects, who were not
      afraid of declaring to the world that they had spirit to
      conceive, and wealth to accomplish, the noblest undertakings.
      Scarcely had the proud structure of the Coliseum been dedicated
      at Rome, before the edifices, of a smaller scale indeed, but of
      the same design and materials, were erected for the use, and at
      the expense, of the cities of Capua and Verona. 65 The
      inscription of the stupendous bridge of Alcantara attests that it
      was thrown over the Tagus by the contribution of a few Lusitanian
      communities. When Pliny was intrusted with the government of
      Bithynia and Pontus, provinces by no means the richest or most
      considerable of the empire, he found the cities within his
      jurisdiction striving with each other in every useful and
      ornamental work, that might deserve the curiosity of strangers,
      or the gratitude of their citizens. It was the duty of the
      proconsul to supply their deficiencies, to direct their taste,
      and sometimes to moderate their emulation. 66 The opulent
      senators of Rome and the provinces esteemed it an honor, and
      almost an obligation, to adorn the splendor of their age and
      country; and the influence of fashion very frequently supplied
      the want of taste or generosity. Among a crowd of these private
      benefactors, we may select Herodes Atticus, an Athenian citizen,
      who lived in the age of the Antonines. Whatever might be the
      motive of his conduct, his magnificence would have been worthy of
      the greatest kings.


      64 (return) [ Sueton. in August. c. 28. Augustus built in Rome
      the temple and forum of Mars the Avenger; the temple of Jupiter
      Tonans in the Capitol; that of Apollo Palatine, with public
      libraries; the portico and basilica of Caius and Lucius; the
      porticos of Livia and Octavia; and the theatre of Marcellus. The
      example of the sovereign was imitated by his ministers and
      generals; and his friend Agrippa left behind him the immortal
      monument of the Pantheon.]


      65 (return) [ See Maffei, Veroni Illustrata, l. iv. p. 68.]


      66 (return) [Footnote 66: See the xth book of Pliny’s Epistles.
      He mentions the following works carried on at the expense of the
      cities. At Nicomedia, a new forum, an aqueduct, and a canal, left
      unfinished by a king; at Nice, a gymnasium, and a theatre, which
      had already cost near ninety thousand pounds; baths at Prusa and
      Claudiopolis, and an aqueduct of sixteen miles in length for the
      use of Sinope.]


      The family of Herod, at least after it had been favored by
      fortune, was lineally descended from Cimon and Miltiades, Theseus
      and Cecrops, Æacus and Jupiter. But the posterity of so many gods
      and heroes was fallen into the most abject state. His grandfather
      had suffered by the hands of justice, and Julius Atticus, his
      father, must have ended his life in poverty and contempt, had he
      not discovered an immense treasure buried under an old house, the
      last remains of his patrimony. According to the rigor of the law,
      the emperor might have asserted his claim, and the prudent
      Atticus prevented, by a frank confession, the officiousness of
      informers. But the equitable Nerva, who then filled the throne,
      refused to accept any part of it, and commanded him to use,
      without scruple, the present of fortune. The cautious Athenian
      still insisted, that the treasure was too considerable for a
      subject, and that he knew not how to _use it. Abuse it then_,
      replied the monarch, with a good-natured peevishness; for it is
      your own. 67 Many will be of opinion, that Atticus literally
      obeyed the emperor’s last instructions; since he expended the
      greatest part of his fortune, which was much increased by an
      advantageous marriage, in the service of the public. He had
      obtained for his son Herod the prefecture of the free cities of
      Asia; and the young magistrate, observing that the town of Troas
      was indifferently supplied with water, obtained from the
      munificence of Hadrian three hundred myriads of drachms, (about a
      hundred thousand pounds,) for the construction of a new aqueduct.
      But in the execution of the work, the charge amounted to more
      than double the estimate, and the officers of the revenue began
      to murmur, till the generous Atticus silenced their complaints,
      by requesting that he might be permitted to take upon himself the
      whole additional expense. 68


      67 (return) [ Hadrian afterwards made a very equitable
      regulation, which divided all treasure-trove between the right of
      property and that of discovery. Hist. August. p. 9.]


      68 (return) [ Philostrat. in Vit. Sophist. l. ii. p. 548.]


      The ablest preceptors of Greece and Asia had been invited by
      liberal rewards to direct the education of young Herod. Their
      pupil soon became a celebrated orator, according to the useless
      rhetoric of that age, which, confining itself to the schools,
      disdained to visit either the Forum or the Senate.


      He was honored with the consulship at Rome: but the greatest part
      of his life was spent in a philosophic retirement at Athens, and
      his adjacent villas; perpetually surrounded by sophists, who
      acknowledged, without reluctance, the superiority of a rich and
      generous rival. 69 The monuments of his genius have perished;
      some considerable ruins still preserve the fame of his taste and
      munificence: modern travellers have measured the remains of the
      stadium which he constructed at Athens. It was six hundred feet
      in length, built entirely of white marble, capable of admitting
      the whole body of the people, and finished in four years, whilst
      Herod was president of the Athenian games. To the memory of his
      wife Regilla he dedicated a theatre, scarcely to be paralleled in
      the empire: no wood except cedar, very curiously carved, was
      employed in any part of the building. The Odeum, 691 designed by
      Pericles for musical performances, and the rehearsal of new
      tragedies, had been a trophy of the victory of the arts over
      barbaric greatness; as the timbers employed in the construction
      consisted chiefly of the masts of the Persian vessels.
      Notwithstanding the repairs bestowed on that ancient edifice by a
      king of Cappadocia, it was again fallen to decay. Herod restored
      its ancient beauty and magnificence. Nor was the liberality of
      that illustrious citizen confined to the walls of Athens. The
      most splendid ornaments bestowed on the temple of Neptune in the
      Isthmus, a theatre at Corinth, a stadium at Delphi, a bath at
      Thermopylæ, and an aqueduct at Canusium in Italy, were
      insufficient to exhaust his treasures. The people of Epirus,
      Thessaly, Eubœa, Bœotia, and Peloponnesus, experienced his
      favors; and many inscriptions of the cities of Greece and Asia
      gratefully style Herodes Atticus their patron and benefactor. 70


      69 (return) [ Aulus Gellius, in Noct. Attic. i. 2, ix. 2, xviii.
      10, xix. 12. Phil ostrat. p. 564.]


      691 (return) [ The Odeum served for the rehearsal of new comedies
      as well as tragedies; they were read or repeated, before
      representation, without music or decorations, &c. No piece could
      be represented in the theatre if it had not been previously
      approved by judges for this purpose. The king of Cappadocia who
      restored the Odeum, which had been burnt by Sylla, was
      Araobarzanes. See Martini, Dissertation on the Odeons of the
      Ancients, Leipsic. 1767, p. 10—91.—W.]


      70 (return) [ See Philostrat. l. ii. p. 548, 560. Pausanias, l.
      i. and vii. 10. The life of Herodes, in the xxxth volume of the
      Memoirs of the Academy of Inscriptions.]


      In the commonwealths of Athens and Rome, the modest simplicity of
      private houses announced the equal condition of freedom; whilst
      the sovereignty of the people was represented in the majestic
      edifices designed to the public use; 71 nor was this republican
      spirit totally extinguished by the introduction of wealth and
      monarchy. It was in works of national honor and benefit, that the
      most virtuous of the emperors affected to display their
      magnificence. The golden palace of Nero excited a just
      indignation, but the vast extent of ground which had been usurped
      by his selfish luxury was more nobly filled under the succeeding
      reigns by the Coliseum, the baths of Titus, the Claudian portico,
      and the temples dedicated to the goddess of Peace, and to the
      genius of Rome. 72 These monuments of architecture, the property
      of the Roman people, were adorned with the most beautiful
      productions of Grecian painting and sculpture; and in the temple
      of Peace, a very curious library was open to the curiosity of the
      learned. 721 At a small distance from thence was situated the
      Forum of Trajan. It was surrounded by a lofty portico, in the
      form of a quadrangle, into which four triumphal arches opened a
      noble and spacious entrance: in the centre arose a column of
      marble, whose height, of one hundred and ten feet, denoted the
      elevation of the hill that had been cut away. This column, which
      still subsists in its ancient beauty, exhibited an exact
      representation of the Dacian victories of its founder. The
      veteran soldier contemplated the story of his own campaigns, and
      by an easy illusion of national vanity, the peaceful citizen
      associated himself to the honors of the triumph. All the other
      quarters of the capital, and all the provinces of the empire,
      were embellished by the same liberal spirit of public
      magnificence, and were filled with amphitheatres, theatres,
      temples, porticoes, triumphal arches, baths and aqueducts, all
      variously conducive to the health, the devotion, and the
      pleasures of the meanest citizen. The last mentioned of those
      edifices deserve our peculiar attention. The boldness of the
      enterprise, the solidity of the execution, and the uses to which
      they were subservient, rank the aqueducts among the noblest
      monuments of Roman genius and power. The aqueducts of the capital
      claim a just preeminence; but the curious traveller, who, without
      the light of history, should examine those of Spoleto, of Metz,
      or of Segovia, would very naturally conclude that those
      provincial towns had formerly been the residence of some potent
      monarch. The solitudes of Asia and Africa were once covered with
      flourishing cities, whose populousness, and even whose existence,
      was derived from such artificial supplies of a perennial stream
      of fresh water. 73


      71 (return) [ It is particularly remarked of Athens by
      Dicæarchus, de Statu Græciæ, p. 8, inter Geographos Minores,
      edit. Hudson.]


      72 (return) [ Donatus de Roma Vetere, l. iii. c. 4, 5, 6. Nardini
      Roma Antica, l. iii. 11, 12, 13, and a Ms. description of ancient
      Rome, by Bernardus Oricellarius, or Rucellai, of which I obtained
      a copy from the library of the Canon Ricardi at Florence. Two
      celebrated pictures of Timanthes and of Protogenes are mentioned
      by Pliny, as in the Temple of Peace; and the Laocoon was found in
      the baths of Titus.]


      721 (return) [ The Emperor Vespasian, who had caused the Temple
      of Peace to be built, transported to it the greatest part of the
      pictures, statues, and other works of art which had escaped the
      civil tumults. It was there that every day the artists and the
      learned of Rome assembled; and it is on the site of this temple
      that a multitude of antiques have been dug up. See notes of
      Reimar on Dion Cassius, lxvi. c. 15, p. 1083.—W.]


      73 (return) [ Montfaucon l’Antiquite Expliquee, tom. iv. p. 2, l.
      i. c. 9. Fabretti has composed a very learned treatise on the
      aqueducts of Rome.]


      We have computed the inhabitants, and contemplated the public
      works, of the Roman empire. The observation of the number and
      greatness of its cities will serve to confirm the former, and to
      multiply the latter. It may not be unpleasing to collect a few
      scattered instances relative to that subject without forgetting,
      however, that from the vanity of nations and the poverty of
      language, the vague appellation of city has been indifferently
      bestowed on Rome and upon Laurentum.


      I. _Ancient_ Italy is said to have contained eleven hundred and
      ninety-seven cities; and for whatsoever æra of antiquity the
      expression might be intended, 74 there is not any reason to
      believe the country less populous in the age of the Antonines,
      than in that of Romulus. The petty states of Latium were
      contained within the metropolis of the empire, by whose superior
      influence they had been attracted. 741 Those parts of Italy which
      have so long languished under the lazy tyranny of priests and
      viceroys, had been afflicted only by the more tolerable
      calamities of war; and the first symptoms of decay which _they_
      experienced, were amply compensated by the rapid improvements of
      the Cisalpine Gaul. The splendor of Verona may be traced in its
      remains: yet Verona was less celebrated than Aquileia or Padua,
      Milan or Ravenna. II. The spirit of improvement had passed the
      Alps, and been felt even in the woods of Britain, which were
      gradually cleared away to open a free space for convenient and
      elegant habitations. York was the seat of government; London was
      already enriched by commerce; and Bath was celebrated for the
      salutary effects of its medicinal waters. Gaul could boast of her
      twelve hundred cities; 75 and though, in the northern parts, many
      of them, without excepting Paris itself, were little more than
      the rude and imperfect townships of a rising people, the southern
      provinces imitated the wealth and elegance of Italy. 76 Many were
      the cities of Gaul, Marseilles, Arles, Nismes, Narbonne,
      Thoulouse, Bourdeaux, Autun, Vienna, Lyons, Langres, and Treves,
      whose ancient condition might sustain an equal, and perhaps
      advantageous comparison with their present state. With regard to
      Spain, that country flourished as a province, and has declined as
      a kingdom. Exhausted by the abuse of her strength, by America,
      and by superstition, her pride might possibly be confounded, if
      we required such a list of three hundred and sixty cities, as
      Pliny has exhibited under the reign of Vespasian. 77 III. Three
      hundred African cities had once acknowledged the authority of
      Carthage, 78 nor is it likely that their numbers diminished under
      the administration of the emperors: Carthage itself rose with new
      splendor from its ashes; and that capital, as well as Capua and
      Corinth, soon recovered all the advantages which can be separated
      from independent sovereignty. IV. The provinces of the East
      present the contrast of Roman magnificence with Turkish
      barbarism. The ruins of antiquity scattered over uncultivated
      fields, and ascribed, by ignorance, to the power of magic,
      scarcely afford a shelter to the oppressed peasant or wandering
      Arab. Under the reign of the Cæsars, the proper Asia alone
      contained five hundred populous cities, 79 enriched with all the
      gifts of nature, and adorned with all the refinements of art.
      Eleven cities of Asia had once disputed the honor of dedicating a
      temple of Tiberius, and their respective merits were examined by
      the senate. 80 Four of them were immediately rejected as unequal
      to the burden; and among these was Laodicea, whose splendor is
      still displayed in its ruins. 81 Laodicea collected a very
      considerable revenue from its flocks of sheep, celebrated for the
      fineness of their wool, and had received, a little before the
      contest, a legacy of above four hundred thousand pounds by the
      testament of a generous citizen. 82 If such was the poverty of
      Laodicea, what must have been the wealth of those cities, whose
      claim appeared preferable, and particularly of Pergamus, of
      Smyrna, and of Ephesus, who so long disputed with each other the
      titular primacy of Asia? 83 The capitals of Syria and Egypt held
      a still superior rank in the empire; Antioch and Alexandria
      looked down with disdain on a crowd of dependent cities, 84 and
      yielded, with reluctance, to the majesty of Rome itself.


      74 (return) [ Ælian. Hist. Var. lib. ix. c. 16. He lived in the
      time of Alexander Severus. See Fabricius, Biblioth. Græca, l. iv.
      c. 21.]


      741 (return) [ This may in some degree account for the difficulty
      started by Livy, as to the incredibly numerous armies raised by
      the small states around Rome where, in his time, a scanty stock
      of free soldiers among a larger population of Roman slaves broke
      the solitude. Vix seminario exiguo militum relicto servitia
      Romana ab solitudine vindicant, Liv. vi. vii. Compare Appian Bel
      Civ. i. 7.—M. subst. for G.]


      75 (return) [ Joseph. de Bell. Jud. ii. 16. The number, however,
      is mentioned, and should be received with a degree of latitude.
      Note: Without doubt no reliance can be placed on this passage of
      Josephus. The historian makes Agrippa give advice to the Jews, as
      to the power of the Romans; and the speech is full of declamation
      which can furnish no conclusions to history. While enumerating
      the nations subject to the Romans, he speaks of the Gauls as
      submitting to 1200 soldiers, (which is false, as there were eight
      legions in Gaul, Tac. iv. 5,) while there are nearly twelve
      hundred cities.—G. Josephus (infra) places these eight legions on
      the Rhine, as Tacitus does.—M.]


      76 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 5.]


      77 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 3, 4, iv. 35. The list
      seems authentic and accurate; the division of the provinces, and
      the different condition of the cities, are minutely
      distinguished.]


      78 (return) [ Strabon. Geograph. l. xvii. p. 1189.]


      79 (return) [ Joseph. de Bell. Jud. ii. 16. Philostrat. in Vit.
      Sophist. l. ii. p. 548, edit. Olear.]


      80 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. iv. 55. I have taken some pains in
      consulting and comparing modern travellers, with regard to the
      fate of those eleven cities of Asia. Seven or eight are totally
      destroyed: Hypæpe, Tralles, Laodicea, Hium, Halicarnassus,
      Miletus, Ephesus, and we may add Sardes. Of the remaining three,
      Pergamus is a straggling village of two or three thousand
      inhabitants; Magnesia, under the name of Guzelhissar, a town of
      some consequence; and Smyrna, a great city, peopled by a hundred
      thousand souls. But even at Smyrna, while the Franks have
      maintained a commerce, the Turks have ruined the arts.]


      81 (return) [ See a very exact and pleasing description of the
      ruins of Laodicea, in Chandler’s Travels through Asia Minor, p.
      225, &c.]


      82 (return) [ Strabo, l. xii. p. 866. He had studied at Tralles.]


      83 (return) [ See a Dissertation of M. de Boze, Mem. de
      l’Academie, tom. xviii. Aristides pronounced an oration, which is
      still extant, to recommend concord to the rival cities.]


      84 (return) [ The inhabitants of Egypt, exclusive of Alexandria,
      amounted to seven millions and a half, (Joseph. de Bell. Jud. ii.
      16.) Under the military government of the Mamelukes, Syria was
      supposed to contain sixty thousand villages, (Histoire de Timur
      Bec, l. v. c. 20.)]


      Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The Antonines.
      Part IV.


      All these cities were connected with each other, and with the
      capital, by the public highways, which, issuing from the Forum of
      Rome, traversed Italy, pervaded the provinces, and were
      terminated only by the frontiers of the empire. If we carefully
      trace the distance from the wall of Antoninus to Rome, and from
      thence to Jerusalem, it will be found that the great chain of
      communication, from the north-west to the south-east point of the
      empire, was drawn out to the length of four thousand and eighty
      Roman miles. 85 The public roads were accurately divided by
      mile-stones, and ran in a direct line from one city to another,
      with very little respect for the obstacles either of nature or
      private property. Mountains were perforated, and bold arches
      thrown over the broadest and most rapid streams. 86 The middle
      part of the road was raised into a terrace which commanded the
      adjacent country, consisted of several strata of sand, gravel,
      and cement, and was paved with large stones, or, in some places
      near the capital, with granite. 87 Such was the solid
      construction of the Roman highways, whose firmness has not
      entirely yielded to the effort of fifteen centuries. They united
      the subjects of the most distant provinces by an easy and
      familiar intercourse; but their primary object had been to
      facilitate the marches of the legions; nor was any country
      considered as completely subdued, till it had been rendered, in
      all its parts, pervious to the arms and authority of the
      conqueror. The advantage of receiving the earliest intelligence,
      and of conveying their orders with celerity, induced the emperors
      to establish, throughout their extensive dominions, the regular
      institution of posts. 88 Houses were everywhere erected at the
      distance only of five or six miles; each of them was constantly
      provided with forty horses, and by the help of these relays, it
      was easy to travel a hundred miles in a day along the Roman
      roads. 89 891 The use of posts was allowed to those who claimed
      it by an Imperial mandate; but though originally intended for the
      public service, it was sometimes indulged to the business or
      conveniency of private citizens. 90 Nor was the communication of
      the Roman empire less free and open by sea than it was by land.
      The provinces surrounded and enclosed the Mediterranean: and
      Italy, in the shape of an immense promontory, advanced into the
      midst of that great lake. The coasts of Italy are, in general,
      destitute of safe harbors; but human industry had corrected the
      deficiencies of nature; and the artificial port of Ostia, in
      particular, situate at the mouth of the Tyber, and formed by the
      emperor Claudius, was a useful monument of Roman greatness. 91
      From this port, which was only sixteen miles from the capital, a
      favorable breeze frequently carried vessels in seven days to the
      columns of Hercules, and in nine or ten, to Alexandria in Egypt.
      92


      85 (return) [ The following Itinerary may serve to convey some
      idea of the direction of the road, and of the distance between
      the principal towns. I. From the wall of Antoninus to York, 222
      Roman miles. II. London, 227. III. Rhutupiæ or Sandwich, 67. IV.
      The navigation to Boulogne, 45. V. Rheims, 174. VI. Lyons, 330.
      VII. Milan, 324. VIII. Rome, 426. IX. Brundusium, 360. X. The
      navigation to Dyrrachium, 40. XI. Byzantium, 711. XII. Ancyra,
      283. XIII. Tarsus, 301. XIV. Antioch, 141. XV. Tyre, 252. XVI.
      Jerusalem, 168. In all 4080 Roman, or 3740 English miles. See the
      Itineraries published by Wesseling, his annotations; Gale and
      Stukeley for Britain, and M. d’Anville for Gaul and Italy.]


      86 (return) [ Montfaucon, l’Antiquite Expliquee, (tom. 4, p. 2,
      l. i. c. 5,) has described the bridges of Narni, Alcantara,
      Nismes, &c.]


      87 (return) [ Bergier, Histoire des grands Chemins de l’Empire
      Romain, l. ii. c. l. l—28.]


      88 (return) [ Procopius in Hist. Arcana, c. 30. Bergier, Hist.
      des grands Chemins, l. iv. Codex Theodosian. l. viii. tit. v.
      vol. ii. p. 506—563 with Godefroy’s learned commentary.]


      89 (return) [ In the time of Theodosius, Cæsarius, a magistrate
      of high rank, went post from Antioch to Constantinople. He began
      his journey at night, was in Cappadocia (165 miles from Antioch)
      the ensuing evening, and arrived at Constantinople the sixth day
      about noon. The whole distance was 725 Roman, or 665 English
      miles. See Libanius, Orat. xxii., and the Itineria, p. 572—581.
      Note: A courier is mentioned in Walpole’s Travels, ii. 335, who
      was to travel from Aleppo to Constantinople, more than 700 miles,
      in eight days, an unusually short journey.—M.]


      891 (return) [ Posts for the conveyance of intelligence were
      established by Augustus. Suet. Aug. 49. The couriers travelled
      with amazing speed. Blair on Roman Slavery, note, p. 261. It is
      probable that the posts, from the time of Augustus, were confined
      to the public service, and supplied by impressment Nerva, as it
      appears from a coin of his reign, made an important change; “he
      established posts upon all the public roads of Italy, and made
      the service chargeable upon his own exchequer. Hadrian,
      perceiving the advantage of this improvement, extended it to all
      the provinces of the empire.” Cardwell on Coins, p. 220.—M.]


      90 (return) [ Pliny, though a favorite and a minister, made an
      apology for granting post-horses to his wife on the most urgent
      business. Epist. x. 121, 122.]


      91 (return) [ Bergier, Hist. des grands Chemins, l. iv. c. 49.]


      92 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. xix. i. [In Proœm.] * Note:
      Pliny says Puteoli, which seems to have been the usual landing
      place from the East. See the voyages of St. Paul, Acts xxviii.
      13, and of Josephus, Vita, c. 3—M.]


      Whatever evils either reason or declamation have imputed to
      extensive empire, the power of Rome was attended with some
      beneficial consequences to mankind; and the same freedom of
      intercourse which extended the vices, diffused likewise the
      improvements, of social life. In the more remote ages of
      antiquity, the world was unequally divided. The East was in the
      immemorial possession of arts and luxury; whilst the West was
      inhabited by rude and warlike barbarians, who either disdained
      agriculture, or to whom it was totally unknown. Under the
      protection of an established government, the productions of
      happier climates, and the industry of more civilized nations,
      were gradually introduced into the western countries of Europe;
      and the natives were encouraged, by an open and profitable
      commerce, to multiply the former, as well as to improve the
      latter. It would be almost impossible to enumerate all the
      articles, either of the animal or the vegetable reign, which were
      successively imported into Europe from Asia and Egypt: 93 but it
      will not be unworthy of the dignity, and much less of the
      utility, of an historical work, slightly to touch on a few of the
      principal heads. 1. Almost all the flowers, the herbs, and the
      fruits, that grow in our European gardens, are of foreign
      extraction, which, in many cases, is betrayed even by their
      names: the apple was a native of Italy, and when the Romans had
      tasted the richer flavor of the apricot, the peach, the
      pomegranate, the citron, and the orange, they contented
      themselves with applying to all these new fruits the common
      denomination of apple, discriminating them from each other by the
      additional epithet of their country. 2. In the time of Homer, the
      vine grew wild in the island of Sicily, and most probably in the
      adjacent continent; but it was not improved by the skill, nor did
      it afford a liquor grateful to the taste, of the savage
      inhabitants. 94 A thousand years afterwards, Italy could boast,
      that of the fourscore most generous and celebrated wines, more
      than two thirds were produced from her soil. 95 The blessing was
      soon communicated to the Narbonnese province of Gaul; but so
      intense was the cold to the north of the Cevennes, that, in the
      time of Strabo, it was thought impossible to ripen the grapes in
      those parts of Gaul. 96 This difficulty, however, was gradually
      vanquished; and there is some reason to believe, that the
      vineyards of Burgundy are as old as the age of the Antonines. 97
      3. The olive, in the western world, followed the progress of
      peace, of which it was considered as the symbol. Two centuries
      after the foundation of Rome, both Italy and Africa were
      strangers to that useful plant: it was naturalized in those
      countries; and at length carried into the heart of Spain and
      Gaul. The timid errors of the ancients, that it required a
      certain degree of heat, and could only flourish in the
      neighborhood of the sea, were insensibly exploded by industry and
      experience. 4. The cultivation of flax was transported from Egypt
      to Gaul, and enriched the whole country, however it might
      impoverish the particular lands on which it was sown. 99 5. The
      use of artificial grasses became familiar to the farmers both of
      Italy and the provinces, particularly the Lucerne, which derived
      its name and origin from Media. 100 The assured supply of
      wholesome and plentiful food for the cattle during winter,
      multiplied the number of the docks and herds, which in their turn
      contributed to the fertility of the soil. To all these
      improvements may be added an assiduous attention to mines and
      fisheries, which, by employing a multitude of laborious hands,
      serve to increase the pleasures of the rich and the subsistence
      of the poor. The elegant treatise of Columella describes the
      advanced state of the Spanish husbandry under the reign of
      Tiberius; and it may be observed, that those famines, which so
      frequently afflicted the infant republic, were seldom or never
      experienced by the extensive empire of Rome. The accidental
      scarcity, in any single province, was immediately relieved by the
      plenty of its more fortunate neighbors.


      93 (return) [ It is not improbable that the Greeks and Phœnicians
      introduced some new arts and productions into the neighborhood of
      Marseilles and Gades.]


      94 (return) [ See Homer, Odyss. l. ix. v. 358.]


      95 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xiv.]


      96 (return) [ Strab. Geograph. l. iv. p. 269. The intense cold of
      a Gallic winter was almost proverbial among the ancients. * Note:
      Strabo only says that the grape does not ripen. Attempts had been
      made in the time of Augustus to naturalize the vine in the north
      of Gaul; but the cold was too great. Diod. Sic. edit. Rhodom. p.
      304.—W. Diodorus (lib. v. 26) gives a curious picture of the
      Italian traders bartering, with the savages of Gaul, a cask of
      wine for a slave.—M. —It appears from the newly discovered
      treatise of Cicero de Republica, that there was a law of the
      republic prohibiting the culture of the vine and olive beyond the
      Alps, in order to keep up the value of those in Italy. Nos
      justissimi homines, qui transalpinas gentes oleam et vitem serere
      non sinimus, quo pluris sint nostra oliveta nostræque vineæ. Lib.
      iii. 9. The restrictive law of Domitian was veiled under the
      decent pretext of encouraging the cultivation of grain. Suet.
      Dom. vii. It was repealed by Probus Vopis Strobus, 18.—M.]


      97 (return) [ In the beginning of the fourth century, the orator
      Eumenius (Panegyr. Veter. viii. 6, edit. Delphin.) speaks of the
      vines in the territory of Autun, which were decayed through age,
      and the first plantation of which was totally unknown. The Pagus
      Arebrignus is supposed by M. d’Anville to be the district of
      Beaune, celebrated, even at present for one of the first growths
      of Burgundy. * Note: This is proved by a passage of Pliny the
      Elder, where he speaks of a certain kind of grape (vitis picata.
      vinum picatum) which grows naturally to the district of Vienne,
      and had recently been transplanted into the country of the
      Arverni, (Auvergne,) of the Helvii, (the Vivarias.) and the
      Burgundy and Franche Compte. Pliny wrote A.D. 77. Hist. Nat. xiv.
      1.— W.]


      99 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. l. xix.]


      100 (return) [ See the agreeable Essays on Agriculture by Mr.
      Harte, in which he has collected all that the ancients and
      moderns have said of Lucerne.]


      Agriculture is the foundation of manufactures; since the
      productions of nature are the materials of art. Under the Roman
      empire, the labor of an industrious and ingenious people was
      variously, but incessantly, employed in the service of the rich.
      In their dress, their table, their houses, and their furniture,
      the favorites of fortune united every refinement of conveniency,
      of elegance, and of splendor, whatever could soothe their pride
      or gratify their sensuality. Such refinements, under the odious
      name of luxury, have been severely arraigned by the moralists of
      every age; and it might perhaps be more conducive to the virtue,
      as well as happiness, of mankind, if all possessed the
      necessaries, and none the superfluities, of life. But in the
      present imperfect condition of society, luxury, though it may
      proceed from vice or folly, seems to be the only means that can
      correct the unequal distribution of property. The diligent
      mechanic, and the skilful artist, who have obtained no share in
      the division of the earth, receive a voluntary tax from the
      possessors of land; and the latter are prompted, by a sense of
      interest, to improve those estates, with whose produce they may
      purchase additional pleasures. This operation, the particular
      effects of which are felt in every society, acted with much more
      diffusive energy in the Roman world. The provinces would soon
      have been exhausted of their wealth, if the manufactures and
      commerce of luxury had not insensibly restored to the industrious
      subjects the sums which were exacted from them by the arms and
      authority of Rome. As long as the circulation was confined within
      the bounds of the empire, it impressed the political machine with
      a new degree of activity, and its consequences, sometimes
      beneficial, could never become pernicious.

