

      “Wheresoever the Roman conquers, he inhabits,” is a very just
      observation of Seneca, 30 confirmed by history and experience.
      The natives of Italy, allured by pleasure or by interest,
      hastened to enjoy the advantages of victory; and we may remark,
      that, about forty years after the reduction of Asia, eighty
      thousand Romans were massacred in one day, by the cruel orders of
      Mithridates. 31 These voluntary exiles were engaged, for the most
      part, in the occupations of commerce, agriculture, and the farm
      of the revenue. But after the legions were rendered permanent by
      the emperors, the provinces were peopled by a race of soldiers;
      and the veterans, whether they received the reward of their
      service in land or in money, usually settled with their families
      in the country, where they had honorably spent their youth.
      Throughout the empire, but more particularly in the western
      parts, the most fertile districts, and the most convenient
      situations, were reserved for the establishment of colonies; some
      of which were of a civil, and others of a military nature. In
      their manners and internal policy, the colonies formed a perfect
      representation of their great parent; and they were soon endeared
      to the natives by the ties of friendship and alliance, they
      effectually diffused a reverence for the Roman name, and a
      desire, which was seldom disappointed, of sharing, in due time,
      its honors and advantages. 32 The municipal cities insensibly
      equalled the rank and splendor of the colonies; and in the reign
      of Hadrian, it was disputed which was the preferable condition,
      of those societies which had issued from, or those which had been
      received into, the bosom of Rome. 33 The right of Latium, as it
      was called, 331 conferred on the cities to which it had been
      granted, a more partial favor. The magistrates only, at the
      expiration of their office, assumed the quality of Roman
      citizens; but as those offices were annual, in a few years they
      circulated round the principal families. 34 Those of the
      provincials who were permitted to bear arms in the legions; 35
      those who exercised any civil employment; all, in a word, who
      performed any public service, or displayed any personal talents,
      were rewarded with a present, whose value was continually
      diminished by the increasing liberality of the emperors. Yet
      even, in the age of the Antonines, when the freedom of the city
      had been bestowed on the greater number of their subjects, it was
      still accompanied with very solid advantages. The bulk of the
      people acquired, with that title, the benefit of the Roman laws,
      particularly in the interesting articles of marriage, testaments,
      and inheritances; and the road of fortune was open to those whose
      pretensions were seconded by favor or merit. The grandsons of the
      Gauls, who had besieged Julius Cæsar in Alesia, commanded
      legions, governed provinces, and were admitted into the senate of
      Rome. 36 Their ambition, instead of disturbing the tranquillity
      of the state, was intimately connected with its safety and
      greatness.


      30 (return) [ Seneca in Consolat. ad Helviam, c. 6.]


      31 (return) [ Memnon apud Photium, (c. 33,) [c. 224, p. 231, ed
      Bekker.] Valer. Maxim. ix. 2. Plutarch and Dion Cassius swell the
      massacre to 150,000 citizens; but I should esteem the smaller
      number to be more than sufficient.]


      32 (return) [ Twenty-five colonies were settled in Spain, (see
      Plin. Hist. Nat. iii. 3, 4; iv. 35;) and nine in Britain, of
      which London, Colchester, Lincoln, Chester, Gloucester, and Bath
      still remain considerable cities. (See Richard of Cirencester, p.
      36, and Whittaker’s History of Manchester, l. i. c. 3.)]


      33 (return) [ Aul. Gel. Noctes Atticæ, xvi 13. The Emperor
      Hadrian expressed his surprise, that the cities of Utica, Gades,
      and Italica, which already enjoyed the rights of _Municipia_,
      should solicit the title of _colonies_. Their example, however,
      became fashionable, and the empire was filled with honorary
      colonies. See Spanheim, de Usu Numismatum Dissertat. xiii.]


      331 (return) [ The right of Latium conferred an exemption from
      the government of the Roman præfect. Strabo states this
      distinctly, l. iv. p. 295, edit. Cæsar’s. See also Walther, p.
      233.—M]


      34 (return) [ Spanheim, Orbis Roman. c. 8, p. 62.]


      35 (return) [ Aristid. in Romæ Encomio. tom. i. p. 218, edit.
      Jebb.]


      36 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xi. 23, 24. Hist. iv. 74.]


      So sensible were the Romans of the influence of language over
      national manners, that it was their most serious care to extend,
      with the progress of their arms, the use of the Latin tongue. 37
      The ancient dialects of Italy, the Sabine, the Etruscan, and the
      Venetian, sunk into oblivion; but in the provinces, the east was
      less docile than the west to the voice of its victorious
      preceptors. This obvious difference marked the two portions of
      the empire with a distinction of colors, which, though it was in
      some degree concealed during the meridian splendor of prosperity,
      became gradually more visible, as the shades of night descended
      upon the Roman world. The western countries were civilized by the
      same hands which subdued them. As soon as the barbarians were
      reconciled to obedience, their minds were open to any new
      impressions of knowledge and politeness. The language of Virgil
      and Cicero, though with some inevitable mixture of corruption,
      was so universally adopted in Africa, Spain, Gaul, Britain, and
      Pannonia, 38 that the faint traces of the Punic or Celtic idioms
      were preserved only in the mountains, or among the peasants. 39
      Education and study insensibly inspired the natives of those
      countries with the sentiments of Romans; and Italy gave fashions,
      as well as laws, to her Latin provincials. They solicited with
      more ardor, and obtained with more facility, the freedom and
      honors of the state; supported the national dignity in letters 40
      and in arms; and at length, in the person of Trajan, produced an
      emperor whom the Scipios would not have disowned for their
      countryman. The situation of the Greeks was very different from
      that of the barbarians. The former had been long since civilized
      and corrupted. They had too much taste to relinquish their
      language, and too much vanity to adopt any foreign institutions.
      Still preserving the prejudices, after they had lost the virtues,
      of their ancestors, they affected to despise the unpolished
      manners of the Roman conquerors, whilst they were compelled to
      respect their superior wisdom and power. 41 Nor was the influence
      of the Grecian language and sentiments confined to the narrow
      limits of that once celebrated country. Their empire, by the
      progress of colonies and conquest, had been diffused from the
      Adriatic to the Euphrates and the Nile. Asia was covered with
      Greek cities, and the long reign of the Macedonian kings had
      introduced a silent revolution into Syria and Egypt. In their
      pompous courts, those princes united the elegance of Athens with
      the luxury of the East, and the example of the court was
      imitated, at an humble distance, by the higher ranks of their
      subjects. Such was the general division of the Roman empire into
      the Latin and Greek languages. To these we may add a third
      distinction for the body of the natives in Syria, and especially
      in Egypt, the use of their ancient dialects, by secluding them
      from the commerce of mankind, checked the improvements of those
      barbarians. 42 The slothful effeminacy of the former exposed them
      to the contempt, the sullen ferociousness of the latter excited
      the aversion, of the conquerors. 43 Those nations had submitted
      to the Roman power, but they seldom desired or deserved the
      freedom of the city: and it was remarked, that more than two
      hundred and thirty years elapsed after the ruin of the Ptolemies,
      before an Egyptian was admitted into the senate of Rome. 44


      37 (return) [ See Plin. Hist. Natur. iii. 5. Augustin. de
      Civitate Dei, xix 7 Lipsius de Pronunciatione Linguæ Latinæ, c.
      3.]


      38 (return) [ Apuleius and Augustin will answer for Africa;
      Strabo for Spain and Gaul; Tacitus, in the life of Agricola, for
      Britain; and Velleius Paterculus, for Pannonia. To them we may
      add the language of the Inscriptions. * Note: Mr. Hallam contests
      this assertion as regards Britain. “Nor did the Romans ever
      establish their language—I know not whether they wished to do
      so—in this island, as we perceive by that stubborn British tongue
      which has survived two conquests.” In his note, Mr. Hallam
      examines the passage from Tacitus (Agric. xxi.) to which Gibbon
      refers. It merely asserts the progress of Latin studies among the
      higher orders. (Midd. Ages, iii. 314.) Probably it was a kind of
      court language, and that of public affairs and prevailed in the
      Roman colonies.—M.]

