
      Without any violation of the principles of the constitution, the
      general of the Roman armies might receive and exercise an
      authority almost despotic over the soldiers, the enemies, and the
      subjects of the republic. With regard to the soldiers, the
      jealousy of freedom had, even from the earliest ages of Rome,
      given way to the hopes of conquest, and a just sense of military
      discipline. The dictator, or consul, had a right to command the
      service of the Roman youth; and to punish an obstinate or
      cowardly disobedience by the most severe and ignominious
      penalties, by striking the offender out of the list of citizens,
      by confiscating his property, and by selling his person into
      slavery. 7 The most sacred rights of freedom, confirmed by the
      Porcian and Sempronian laws, were suspended by the military
      engagement. In his camp the general exercised an absolute power
      of life and death; his jurisdiction was not confined by any forms
      of trial, or rules of proceeding, and the execution of the
      sentence was immediate and without appeal. 8 The choice of the
      enemies of Rome was regularly decided by the legislative
      authority. The most important resolutions of peace and war were
      seriously debated in the senate, and solemnly ratified by the
      people. But when the arms of the legions were carried to a great
      distance from Italy, the general assumed the liberty of directing
      them against whatever people, and in whatever manner, they judged
      most advantageous for the public service. It was from the
      success, not from the justice, of their enterprises, that they
      expected the honors of a triumph. In the use of victory,
      especially after they were no longer controlled by the
      commissioners of the senate, they exercised the most unbounded
      despotism. When Pompey commanded in the East, he rewarded his
      soldiers and allies, dethroned princes, divided kingdoms, founded
      colonies, and distributed the treasures of Mithridates. On his
      return to Rome, he obtained, by a single act of the senate and
      people, the universal ratification of all his proceedings. 9 Such
      was the power over the soldiers, and over the enemies of Rome,
      which was either granted to, or assumed by, the generals of the
      republic. They were, at the same time, the governors, or rather
      monarchs, of the conquered provinces, united the civil with the
      military character, administered justice as well as the finances,
      and exercised both the executive and legislative power of the
      state.


      7 (return) [ Livy Epitom. l. xiv. [c. 27.] Valer. Maxim. vi. 3.]


      8 (return) [ See, in the viiith book of Livy, the conduct of
      Manlius Torquatus and Papirius Cursor. They violated the laws of
      nature and humanity, but they asserted those of military
      discipline; and the people, who abhorred the action, was obliged
      to respect the principle.]


      9 (return) [ By the lavish but unconstrained suffrages of the
      people, Pompey had obtained a military command scarcely inferior
      to that of Augustus. Among the extraordinary acts of power
      executed by the former we may remark the foundation of
      twenty-nine cities, and the distribution of three or four
      millions sterling to his troops. The ratification of his acts met
      with some opposition and delays in the senate See Plutarch,
      Appian, Dion Cassius, and the first book of the epistles to
      Atticus.]


      From what has already been observed in the first chapter of this
      work, some notion may be formed of the armies and provinces thus
      intrusted to the ruling hand of Augustus. But as it was
      impossible that he could personally command the regions of so
      many distant frontiers, he was indulged by the senate, as Pompey
      had already been, in the permission of devolving the execution of
      his great office on a sufficient number of lieutenants. In rank
      and authority these officers seemed not inferior to the ancient
      proconsuls; but their station was dependent and precarious. They
      received and held their commissions at the will of a superior, to
      whose auspicious influence the merit of their action was legally
      attributed. 10 They were the representatives of the emperor. The
      emperor alone was the general of the republic, and his
      jurisdiction, civil as well as military, extended over all the
      conquests of Rome. It was some satisfaction, however, to the
      senate, that he always delegated his power to the members of
      their body. The imperial lieutenants were of consular or
      prætorian dignity; the legions were commanded by senators, and
      the præfecture of Egypt was the only important trust committed to
      a Roman knight.


      10 (return) [ Under the commonwealth, a triumph could only be
      claimed by the general, who was authorized to take the Auspices
      in the name of the people. By an exact consequence, drawn from
      this principle of policy and religion, the triumph was reserved
      to the emperor; and his most successful lieutenants were
      satisfied with some marks of distinction, which, under the name
      of triumphal honors, were invented in their favor.]


      Within six days after Augustus had been compelled to accept so
      very liberal a grant, he resolved to gratify the pride of the
      senate by an easy sacrifice. He represented to them, that they
      had enlarged his powers, even beyond that degree which might be
      required by the melancholy condition of the times. They had not
      permitted him to refuse the laborious command of the armies and
      the frontiers; but he must insist on being allowed to restore the
      more peaceful and secure provinces to the mild administration of
      the civil magistrate. In the division of the provinces, Augustus
      provided for his own power and for the dignity of the republic.
      The proconsuls of the senate, particularly those of Asia, Greece,
      and Africa, enjoyed a more honorable character than the
      lieutenants of the emperor, who commanded in Gaul or Syria. The
      former were attended by lictors, the latter by soldiers. 105 A
      law was passed, that wherever the emperor was present, his
      extraordinary commission should supersede the ordinary
      jurisdiction of the governor; a custom was introduced, that the
      new conquests belonged to the imperial portion; and it was soon
      discovered that the authority of the _Prince_, the favorite
      epithet of Augustus, was the same in every part of the empire.


      105 (return) [ This distinction is without foundation. The
      lieutenants of the emperor, who were called Proprætors, whether
      they had been prætors or consuls, were attended by six lictors;
      those who had the right of the sword, (of life and death over the
      soldiers.—M.) bore the military habit (paludamentum) and the
      sword. The provincial governors commissioned by the senate, who,
      whether they had been consuls or not, were called Pronconsuls,
      had twelve lictors when they had been consuls, and six only when
      they had but been prætors. The provinces of Africa and Asia were
      only given to ex-consuls. See, on the Organization of the
      Provinces, Dion, liii. 12, 16 Strabo, xvii 840.—W]


      In return for this imaginary concession, Augustus obtained an
      important privilege, which rendered him master of Rome and Italy.
      By a dangerous exception to the ancient maxims, he was authorized
      to preserve his military command, supported by a numerous body of
      guards, even in time of peace, and in the heart of the capital.
      His command, indeed, was confined to those citizens who were
      engaged in the service by the military oath; but such was the
      propensity of the Romans to servitude, that the oath was
      voluntarily taken by the magistrates, the senators, and the
      equestrian order, till the homage of flattery was insensibly
      converted into an annual and solemn protestation of fidelity.


      Although Augustus considered a military force as the firmest
      foundation, he wisely rejected it, as a very odious instrument of
      government. It was more agreeable to his temper, as well as to
      his policy, to reign under the venerable names of ancient
      magistracy, and artfully to collect, in his own person, all the
      scattered rays of civil jurisdiction. With this view, he
      permitted the senate to confer upon him, for his life, the powers
      of the consular 11 and tribunitian offices, 12 which were, in the
      same manner, continued to all his successors. The consuls had
      succeeded to the kings of Rome, and represented the dignity of
      the state. They superintended the ceremonies of religion, levied
      and commanded the legions, gave audience to foreign ambassadors,
      and presided in the assemblies both of the senate and people. The
      general control of the finances was intrusted to their care; and
      though they seldom had leisure to administer justice in person,
      they were considered as the supreme guardians of law, equity, and
      the public peace. Such was their ordinary jurisdiction; but
      whenever the senate empowered the first magistrate to consult the
      safety of the commonwealth, he was raised by that decree above
      the laws, and exercised, in the defence of liberty, a temporary
      despotism. 13 The character of the tribunes was, in every
      respect, different from that of the consuls. The appearance of
      the former was modest and humble; but their persons were sacred
      and inviolable. Their force was suited rather for opposition than
      for action. They were instituted to defend the oppressed, to
      pardon offences, to arraign the enemies of the people, and, when
      they judged it necessary, to stop, by a single word, the whole
      machine of government. As long as the republic subsisted, the
      dangerous influence, which either the consul or the tribune might
      derive from their respective jurisdiction, was diminished by
      several important restrictions. Their authority expired with the
      year in which they were elected; the former office was divided
      between two, the latter among ten persons; and, as both in their
      private and public interest they were averse to each other, their
      mutual conflicts contributed, for the most part, to strengthen
      rather than to destroy the balance of the constitution. 131 But
      when the consular and tribunitian powers were united, when they
      were vested for life in a single person, when the general of the
      army was, at the same time, the minister of the senate and the
      representative of the Roman people, it was impossible to resist
      the exercise, nor was it easy to define the limits, of his
      imperial prerogative.


      11 (return) [ Cicero (de Legibus, iii. 3) gives the consular
      office the name of egia potestas; and Polybius (l. vi. c. 3)
      observes three powers in the Roman constitution. The monarchical
      was represented and exercised by the consuls.]


      12 (return) [ As the tribunitian power (distinct from the annual
      office) was first invented by the dictator Cæsar, (Dion, l. xliv.
      p. 384,) we may easily conceive, that it was given as a reward
      for having so nobly asserted, by arms, the sacred rights of the
      tribunes and people. See his own Commentaries, de Bell. Civil. l.
      i.]


      13 (return) [ Augustus exercised nine annual consulships without
      interruption. He then most artfully refused the magistracy, as
      well as the dictatorship, absented himself from Rome, and waited
      till the fatal effects of tumult and faction forced the senate to
      invest him with a perpetual consulship. Augustus, as well as his
      successors, affected, however, to conceal so invidious a title.]


      131 (return) [ The note of M. Guizot on the tribunitian power
      applies to the French translation rather than to the original.
      The former has, maintenir la balance toujours egale, which
      implies much more than Gibbon’s general expression. The note
      belongs rather to the history of the Republic than that of the
      Empire.—M]


      To these accumulated honors, the policy of Augustus soon added
      the splendid as well as important dignities of supreme pontiff,
      and of censor. By the former he acquired the management of the
      religion, and by the latter a legal inspection over the manners
      and fortunes, of the Roman people. If so many distinct and
      independent powers did not exactly unite with each other, the
      complaisance of the senate was prepared to supply every
      deficiency by the most ample and extraordinary concessions. The
      emperors, as the first ministers of the republic, were exempted
      from the obligation and penalty of many inconvenient laws: they
      were authorized to convoke the senate, to make several motions in
      the same day, to recommend candidates for the honors of the
      state, to enlarge the bounds of the city, to employ the revenue
      at their discretion, to declare peace and war, to ratify
      treaties; and by a most comprehensive clause, they were empowered
      to execute whatsoever they should judge advantageous to the
      empire, and agreeable to the majesty of things private or public,
      human of divine. 14


      14 (return) [ See a fragment of a Decree of the Senate,
      conferring on the emperor Vespasian all the powers granted to his
      predecessors, Augustus, Tiberius, and Claudius. This curious and
      important monument is published in Gruter’s Inscriptions, No.
      ccxlii. * Note: It is also in the editions of Tacitus by Ryck,
      (Annal. p. 420, 421,) and Ernesti, (Excurs. ad lib. iv. 6;) but
      this fragment contains so many inconsistencies, both in matter
      and form, that its authenticity may be doubted—W.]


      When all the various powers of executive government were
      committed to the _Imperial magistrate_, the ordinary magistrates
      of the commonwealth languished in obscurity, without vigor, and
      almost without business. The names and forms of the ancient
      administration were preserved by Augustus with the most anxious
      care. The usual number of consuls, prætors, and tribunes, 15 were
      annually invested with their respective ensigns of office, and
      continued to discharge some of their least important functions.
      Those honors still attracted the vain ambition of the Romans; and
      the emperors themselves, though invested for life with the powers
      of the consulship, frequently aspired to the title of that annual
      dignity, which they condescended to share with the most
      illustrious of their fellow-citizens. 16 In the election of these
      magistrates, the people, during the reign of Augustus, were
      permitted to expose all the inconveniences of a wild democracy.
      That artful prince, instead of discovering the least symptom of
      impatience, humbly solicited their suffrages for himself or his
      friends, and scrupulously practised all the duties of an ordinary
      candidate. 17 But we may venture to ascribe to his councils the
      first measure of the succeeding reign, by which the elections
      were transferred to the senate. 18 The assemblies of the people
      were forever abolished, and the emperors were delivered from a
      dangerous multitude, who, without restoring liberty, might have
      disturbed, and perhaps endangered, the established government.


    