
      26 (return) [ As Octavianus advanced to the banquet of the
      Cæsars, his color changed like that of the chameleon; pale at
      first, then red, afterwards black, he at last assumed the mild
      livery of Venus and the Graces, (Cæsars, p. 309.) This image,
      employed by Julian in his ingenious fiction, is just and elegant;
      but when he considers this change of character as real and
      ascribes it to the power of philosophy, he does too much honor to
      philosophy and to Octavianus.]


      I. The death of Cæsar was ever before his eyes. He had lavished
      wealth and honors on his adherents; but the most favored friends
      of his uncle were in the number of the conspirators. The fidelity
      of the legions might defend his authority against open rebellion;
      but their vigilance could not secure his person from the dagger
      of a determined republican; and the Romans, who revered the
      memory of Brutus, 27 would applaud the imitation of his virtue.
      Cæsar had provoked his fate, as much as by the ostentation of his
      power, as by his power itself. The consul or the tribune might
      have reigned in peace. The title of king had armed the Romans
      against his life. Augustus was sensible that mankind is governed
      by names; nor was he deceived in his expectation, that the senate
      and people would submit to slavery, provided they were
      respectfully assured that they still enjoyed their ancient
      freedom. A feeble senate and enervated people cheerfully
      acquiesced in the pleasing illusion, as long as it was supported
      by the virtue, or even by the prudence, of the successors of
      Augustus. It was a motive of self-preservation, not a principle
      of liberty, that animated the conspirators against Caligula,
      Nero, and Domitian. They attacked the person of the tyrant,
      without aiming their blow at the authority of the emperor.


      27 (return) [ Two centuries after the establishment of monarchy,
      the emperor Marcus Antoninus recommends the character of Brutus
      as a perfect model of Roman virtue. * Note: In a very ingenious
      essay, Gibbon has ventured to call in question the preeminent
      virtue of Brutus. Misc Works, iv. 95.—M.]


      There appears, indeed, _one_ memorable occasion, in which the
      senate, after seventy years of patience, made an ineffectual
      attempt to re-assume its long-forgotten rights. When the throne
      was vacant by the murder of Caligula, the consuls convoked that
      assembly in the Capitol, condemned the memory of the Cæsars, gave
      the watchword _liberty_ to the few cohorts who faintly adhered to
      their standard, and during eight-and-forty hours acted as the
      independent chiefs of a free commonwealth. But while they
      deliberated, the prætorian guards had resolved. The stupid
      Claudius, brother of Germanicus, was already in their camp,
      invested with the Imperial purple, and prepared to support his
      election by arms. The dream of liberty was at an end; and the
      senate awoke to all the horrors of inevitable servitude. Deserted
      by the people, and threatened by a military force, that feeble
      assembly was compelled to ratify the choice of the prætorians,
      and to embrace the benefit of an amnesty, which Claudius had the
      prudence to offer, and the generosity to observe. 28


      28 (return) [ It is much to be regretted that we have lost the
      part of Tacitus which treated of that transaction. We are forced
      to content ourselves with the popular rumors of Josephus, and the
      imperfect hints of Dion and Suetonius.]


      II. The insolence of the armies inspired Augustus with fears of a
      still more alarming nature. The despair of the citizens could
      only attempt, what the power of the soldiers was, at any time,
      able to execute. How precarious was his own authority over men
      whom he had taught to violate every social duty! He had heard
      their seditious clamors; he dreaded their calmer moments of
      reflection. One revolution had been purchased by immense rewards;
      but a second revolution might double those rewards. The troops
      professed the fondest attachment to the house of Cæsar; but the
      attachments of the multitude are capricious and inconstant.
      Augustus summoned to his aid whatever remained in those fierce
      minds of Roman prejudices; enforced the rigor of discipline by
      the sanction of law; and, interposing the majesty of the senate
      between the emperor and the army, boldly claimed their
      allegiance, as the first magistrate of the republic.


      During a long period of two hundred and twenty years from the
      establishment of this artful system to the death of Commodus, the
      dangers inherent to a military government were, in a great
      measure, suspended. The soldiers were seldom roused to that fatal
      sense of their own strength, and of the weakness of the civil
      authority, which was, before and afterwards, productive of such
      dreadful calamities. Caligula and Domitian were assassinated in
      their palace by their own domestics: 281 the convulsions which
      agitated Rome on the death of the former, were confined to the
      walls of the city. But Nero involved the whole empire in his
      ruin. In the space of eighteen months, four princes perished by
      the sword; and the Roman world was shaken by the fury of the
      contending armies. Excepting only this short, though violent
      eruption of military license, the two centuries from Augustus 29
      to Commodus passed away unstained with civil blood, and
      undisturbed by revolutions. The emperor was elected by _the
      authority of the senate_, and _the consent of the soldiers_. 30
      The legions respected their oath of fidelity; and it requires a
      minute inspection of the Roman annals to discover three
      inconsiderable rebellions, which were all suppressed in a few
      months, and without even the hazard of a battle. 31


      281 (return) [ Caligula perished by a conspiracy formed by the
      officers of the prætorian troops, and Domitian would not,
      perhaps, have been assassinated without the participation of the
      two chiefs of that guard in his death.—W.]


      29 (return) [ Augustus restored the ancient severity of
      discipline. After the civil wars, he dropped the endearing name
      of Fellow-Soldiers, and called them only Soldiers, (Sueton. in
      August. c. 25.) See the use Tiberius made of the Senate in the
      mutiny of the Pannonian legions, (Tacit. Annal. i.)]


      30 (return) [ These words seem to have been the constitutional
      language. See Tacit. Annal. xiii. 4. * Note: This panegyric on
      the soldiery is rather too liberal. Claudius was obliged to
      purchase their consent to his coronation: the presents which he
      made, and those which the prætorians received on other occasions,
      considerably embarrassed the finances. Moreover, this formidable
      guard favored, in general, the cruelties of the tyrants. The
      distant revolts were more frequent than Gibbon thinks: already,
      under Tiberius, the legions of Germany would have seditiously
      constrained Germanicus to assume the Imperial purple. On the
      revolt of Claudius Civilis, under Vespasian, the legions of Gaul
      murdered their general, and offered their assistance to the Gauls
      who were in insurrection. Julius Sabinus made himself be
      proclaimed emperor, &c. The wars, the merit, and the severe
      discipline of Trajan, Hadrian, and the two Antonines,
      established, for some time, a greater degree of subordination.—W]


      31 (return) [ The first was Camillus Scribonianus, who took up
      arms in Dalmatia against Claudius, and was deserted by his own
      troops in five days, the second, L. Antonius, in Germany, who
      rebelled against Domitian; and the third, Avidius Cassius, in the
      reign of M. Antoninus. The two last reigned but a few months, and
      were cut off by their own adherents. We may observe, that both
      Camillus and Cassius colored their ambition with the design of
      restoring the republic; a task, said Cassius peculiarly reserved
      for his name and family.]


      In elective monarchies, the vacancy of the throne is a moment big
      with danger and mischief. The Roman emperors, desirous to spare
      the legions that interval of suspense, and the temptation of an
      irregular choice, invested their designed successor with so large
      a share of present power, as should enable him, after their
      decease, to assume the remainder, without suffering the empire to
      perceive the change of masters. Thus Augustus, after all his
      fairer prospects had been snatched from him by untimely deaths,
      rested his last hopes on Tiberius, obtained for his adopted son
      the censorial and tribunitian powers, and dictated a law, by
      which the future prince was invested with an authority equal to
      his own, over the provinces and the armies. 32 Thus Vespasian
      subdued the generous mind of his eldest son. Titus was adored by
      the eastern legions, which, under his command, had recently
      achieved the conquest of Judæa. His power was dreaded, and, as
      his virtues were clouded by the intemperance of youth, his
      designs were suspected. Instead of listening to such unworthy
      suspicions, the prudent monarch associated Titus to the full
      powers of the Imperial dignity; and the grateful son ever
      approved himself the humble and faithful minister of so indulgent
      a father. 33


      32 (return) [ Velleius Paterculus, l. ii. c. 121. Sueton. in
      Tiber. c. 26.]


      33 (return) [ Sueton. in Tit. c. 6. Plin. in Præfat. Hist.
      Natur.]


      The good sense of Vespasian engaged him indeed to embrace every
      measure that might confirm his recent and precarious elevation.
      The military oath, and the fidelity of the troops, had been
      consecrated, by the habits of a hundred years, to the name and
      family of the Cæsars; and although that family had been continued
      only by the fictitious rite of adoption, the Romans still
      revered, in the person of Nero, the grandson of Germanicus, and
      the lineal successor of Augustus. It was not without reluctance
      and remorse, that the prætorian guards had been persuaded to
      abandon the cause of the tyrant. 34 The rapid downfall of Galba,
      Otho, and Vitellus, taught the armies to consider the emperors as
      the creatures of _their_ will, and the instruments of _their_
      license. The birth of Vespasian was mean: his grandfather had
      been a private soldier, his father a petty officer of the
      revenue; 35 his own merit had raised him, in an advanced age, to
      the empire; but his merit was rather useful than shining, and his
      virtues were disgraced by a strict and even sordid parsimony.
      Such a prince consulted his true interest by the association of a
      son, whose more splendid and amiable character might turn the
      public attention from the obscure origin, to the future glories,
      of the Flavian house. Under the mild administration of Titus, the
      Roman world enjoyed a transient felicity, and his beloved memory
      served to protect, above fifteen years, the vices of his brother
      Domitian.


      34 (return) [ This idea is frequently and strongly inculcated by
      Tacitus. See Hist. i. 5, 16, ii. 76.]


      35 (return) [ The emperor Vespasian, with his usual good sense,
      laughed at the genealogists, who deduced his family from Flavius,
      the founder of Reate, (his native country,) and one of the
      companions of Hercules Suet in Vespasian, c. 12.]


      Nerva had scarcely accepted the purple from the assassins of
      Domitian, before he discovered that his feeble age was unable to
      stem the torrent of public disorders, which had multiplied under
      the long tyranny of his predecessor. His mild disposition was
      respected by the good; but the degenerate Romans required a more
      vigorous character, whose justice should strike terror into the
      guilty. Though he had several relations, he fixed his choice on a
      stranger. He adopted Trajan, then about forty years of age, and
      who commanded a powerful army in the Lower Germany; and
      immediately, by a decree of the senate, declared him his
      colleague and successor in the empire. 36 It is sincerely to be
      lamented, that whilst we are fatigued with the disgustful
      relation of Nero’s crimes and follies, we are reduced to collect
      the actions of Trajan from the glimmerings of an abridgment, or
      the doubtful light of a panegyric. There remains, however, one
      panegyric far removed beyond the suspicion of flattery. Above two
      hundred and fifty years after the death of Trajan, the senate, in
      pouring out the customary acclamations on the accession of a new
      emperor, wished that he might surpass the felicity of Augustus,
      and the virtue of Trajan. 37


      36 (return) [ Dion, l. lxviii. p. 1121. Plin. Secund. in
      Panegyric.]


      37 (return) [ Felicior Augusto, Melior Trajano. Eutrop. viii. 5.]


      We may readily believe, that the father of his country hesitated
      whether he ought to intrust the various and doubtful character of
      his kinsman Hadrian with sovereign power. In his last moments the
      arts of the empress Plotina either fixed the irresolution of
      Trajan, or boldly supposed a fictitious adoption; 38 the truth of
      which could not be safely disputed, and Hadrian was peaceably
      acknowledged as his lawful successor. Under his reign, as has
      been already mentioned, the empire flourished in peace and
      prosperity. He encouraged the arts, reformed the laws, asserted
      military discipline, and visited all his provinces in person. His
      vast and active genius was equally suited to the most enlarged
      views, and the minute details of civil policy. But the ruling
      passions of his soul were curiosity and vanity. As they
      prevailed, and as they were attracted by different objects,
      Hadrian was, by turns, an excellent prince, a ridiculous sophist,
      and a jealous tyrant. The general tenor of his conduct deserved
      praise for its equity and moderation. Yet in the first days of
      his reign, he put to death four consular senators, his personal
      enemies, and men who had been judged worthy of empire; and the
      tediousness of a painful illness rendered him, at last, peevish
      and cruel. The senate doubted whether they should pronounce him a
      god or a tyrant; and the honors decreed to his memory were
      granted to the prayers of the pious Antoninus. 39


      38 (return) [ Dion (l. lxix. p. 1249) affirms the whole to have
      been a fiction, on the authority of his father, who, being
      governor of the province where Trajan died, had very good
      opportunities of sifting this mysterious transaction. Yet Dodwell
      (Prælect. Camden. xvii.) has maintained that Hadrian was called
      to the certain hope of the empire, during the lifetime of
      Trajan.]

