
      88 (return) [ Bergier, Hist. des Grands Chemins, l. iii. c. 1, 2,
      3, 4, a very useful collection.]


      89 (return) [ See Templeman’s Survey of the Globe; but I distrust
      both the Doctor’s learning and his maps.]


      Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The
      Antonines.—Part I.


Of The Union And Internal Prosperity Of The Roman Empire, In The Age Of
The Antonines.


      It is not alone by the rapidity, or extent of conquest, that we
      should estimate the greatness of Rome. The sovereign of the
      Russian deserts commands a larger portion of the globe. In the
      seventh summer after his passage of the Hellespont, Alexander
      erected the Macedonian trophies on the banks of the Hyphasis. 1
      Within less than a century, the irresistible Zingis, and the
      Mogul princes of his race, spread their cruel devastations and
      transient empire from the Sea of China, to the confines of Egypt
      and Germany. 2 But the firm edifice of Roman power was raised and
      preserved by the wisdom of ages. The obedient provinces of Trajan
      and the Antonines were united by laws, and adorned by arts. They
      might occasionally suffer from the partial abuse of delegated
      authority; but the general principle of government was wise,
      simple, and beneficent. They enjoyed the religion of their
      ancestors, whilst in civil honors and advantages they were
      exalted, by just degrees, to an equality with their conquerors.


      1 (return) [ They were erected about the midway between Lahor and
      Delhi. The conquests of Alexander in Hindostan were confined to
      the Punjab, a country watered by the five great streams of the
      Indus. * Note: The Hyphasis is one of the five rivers which join
      the Indus or the Sind, after having traversed the province of the
      Pendj-ab—a name which in Persian, signifies _five rivers_. * * *
      G. The five rivers were, 1. The Hydaspes, now the Chelum, Behni,
      or Bedusta, (_Sanscrit_, Vitashà, Arrow-swift.) 2. The Acesines,
      the Chenab, (_Sanscrit_, Chandrabhágâ, Moon-gift.) 3. Hydraotes,
      the Ravey, or Iraoty, (_Sanscrit_, Irâvatî.) 4. Hyphasis, the
      Beyah, (_Sanscrit_, Vepâsà, Fetterless.) 5. The Satadru,
      (_Sanscrit_, the Hundred Streamed,) the Sutledj, known first to
      the Greeks in the time of Ptolemy. Rennel. Vincent, Commerce of
      Anc. book 2. Lassen, Pentapotam. Ind. Wilson’s Sanscrit Dict.,
      and the valuable memoir of Lieut. Burnes, Journal of London
      Geogr. Society, vol. iii. p. 2, with the travels of that very
      able writer. Compare Gibbon’s own note, c. lxv. note 25.—M
      substit. for G.]


      2 (return) [ See M. de Guignes, Histoire des Huns, l. xv. xvi.
      and xvii.]


      I. The policy of the emperors and the senate, as far as it
      concerned religion, was happily seconded by the reflections of
      the enlightened, and by the habits of the superstitious, part of
      their subjects. The various modes of worship, which prevailed in
      the Roman world, were all considered by the people, as equally
      true; by the philosopher, as equally false; and by the
      magistrate, as equally useful. And thus toleration produced not
      only mutual indulgence, but even religious concord.


      The superstition of the people was not imbittered by any mixture
      of theological rancor; nor was it confined by the chains of any
      speculative system. The devout polytheist, though fondly attached
      to his national rites, admitted with implicit faith the different
      religions of the earth. 3 Fear, gratitude, and curiosity, a dream
      or an omen, a singular disorder, or a distant journey,
      perpetually disposed him to multiply the articles of his belief,
      and to enlarge the list of his protectors. The thin texture of
      the Pagan mythology was interwoven with various but not
      discordant materials. As soon as it was allowed that sages and
      heroes, who had lived or who had died for the benefit of their
      country, were exalted to a state of power and immortality, it was
      universally confessed, that they deserved, if not the adoration,
      at least the reverence, of all mankind. The deities of a thousand
      groves and a thousand streams possessed, in peace, their local
      and respective influence; nor could the Romans who deprecated the
      wrath of the Tiber, deride the Egyptian who presented his
      offering to the beneficent genius of the Nile. The visible powers
      of nature, the planets, and the elements were the same throughout
      the universe. The invisible governors of the moral world were
      inevitably cast in a similar mould of fiction and allegory. Every
      virtue, and even vice, acquired its divine representative; every
      art and profession its patron, whose attributes, in the most
      distant ages and countries, were uniformly derived from the
      character of their peculiar votaries. A republic of gods of such
      opposite tempers and interests required, in every system, the
      moderating hand of a supreme magistrate, who, by the progress of
      knowledge and flattery, was gradually invested with the sublime
      perfections of an Eternal Parent, and an Omnipotent Monarch. 4
      Such was the mild spirit of antiquity, that the nations were less
      attentive to the difference, than to the resemblance, of their
      religious worship. The Greek, the Roman, and the Barbarian, as
      they met before their respective altars, easily persuaded
      themselves, that under various names, and with various
      ceremonies, they adored the same deities. 5 The elegant mythology
      of Homer gave a beautiful, and almost a regular form, to the
      polytheism of the ancient world.


      3 (return) [ There is not any writer who describes in so lively a
      manner as Herodotus the true genius of polytheism. The best
      commentary may be found in Mr. Hume’s Natural History of
      Religion; and the best contrast in Bossuet’s Universal History.
      Some obscure traces of an intolerant spirit appear in the conduct
      of the Egyptians, (see Juvenal, Sat. xv.;) and the Christians, as
      well as Jews, who lived under the Roman empire, formed a very
      important exception; so important indeed, that the discussion
      will require a distinct chapter of this work. * Note: M.
      Constant, in his very learned and eloquent work, “Sur la
      Religion,” with the two additional volumes, “Du Polytheisme
      Romain,” has considered the whole history of polytheism in a tone
      of philosophy, which, without subscribing to all his opinions, we
      may be permitted to admire. “The boasted tolerance of polytheism
      did not rest upon the respect due from society to the freedom of
      individual opinion. The polytheistic nations, tolerant as they
      were towards each other, as separate states, were not the less
      ignorant of the eternal principle, the only basis of enlightened
      toleration, that every one has a right to worship God in the
      manner which seems to him the best. Citizens, on the contrary,
      were bound to conform to the religion of the state; they had not
      the liberty to adopt a foreign religion, though that religion
      might be legally recognized in their own city, for the strangers
      who were its votaries.” —Sur la Religion, v. 184. Du. Polyth.
      Rom. ii. 308. At this time, the growing religious indifference,
      and the general administration of the empire by Romans, who,
      being strangers, would do no more than protect, not enlist
      themselves in the cause of the local superstitions, had
      introduced great laxity. But intolerance was clearly the theory
      both of the Greek and Roman law. The subject is more fully
      considered in another place.—M.]
