
      But it is no easy task to confine luxury within the limits of an
      empire. The most remote countries of the ancient world were
      ransacked to supply the pomp and delicacy of Rome. The forests of
      Scythia afforded some valuable furs. Amber was brought over land
      from the shores of the Baltic to the Danube; and the barbarians
      were astonished at the price which they received in exchange for
      so useless a commodity. 101 There was a considerable demand for
      Babylonian carpets, and other manufactures of the East; but the
      most important and unpopular branch of foreign trade was carried
      on with Arabia and India. Every year, about the time of the
      summer solstice, a fleet of a hundred and twenty vessels sailed
      from Myos-hormos, a port of Egypt, on the Red Sea. By the
      periodical assistance of the monsoons, they traversed the ocean
      in about forty days. The coast of Malabar, or the island of
      Ceylon, 102 was the usual term of their navigation, and it was in
      those markets that the merchants from the more remote countries
      of Asia expected their arrival. The return of the fleet of Egypt
      was fixed to the months of December or January; and as soon as
      their rich cargo had been transported on the backs of camels,
      from the Red Sea to the Nile, and had descended that river as far
      as Alexandria, it was poured, without delay, into the capital of
      the empire. 103 The objects of oriental traffic were splendid and
      trifling; silk, a pound of which was esteemed not inferior in
      value to a pound of gold; 104 precious stones, among which the
      pearl claimed the first rank after the diamond; 105 and a variety
      of aromatics, that were consumed in religious worship and the
      pomp of funerals. The labor and risk of the voyage was rewarded
      with almost incredible profit; but the profit was made upon Roman
      subjects, and a few individuals were enriched at the expense of
      the public. As the natives of Arabia and India were contented
      with the productions and manufactures of their own country,
      silver, on the side of the Romans, was the principal, if not the
      only 1051 instrument of commerce. It was a complaint worthy of
      the gravity of the senate, that, in the purchase of female
      ornaments, the wealth of the state was irrecoverably given away
      to foreign and hostile nations. 106 The annual loss is computed,
      by a writer of an inquisitive but censorious temper, at upwards
      of eight hundred thousand pounds sterling. 107 Such was the style
      of discontent, brooding over the dark prospect of approaching
      poverty. And yet, if we compare the proportion between gold and
      silver, as it stood in the time of Pliny, and as it was fixed in
      the reign of Constantine, we shall discover within that period a
      very considerable increase. 108 There is not the least reason to
      suppose that gold was become more scarce; it is therefore evident
      that silver was grown more common; that whatever might be the
      amount of the Indian and Arabian exports, they were far from
      exhausting the wealth of the Roman world; and that the produce of
      the mines abundantly supplied the demands of commerce.


      101 (return) [ Tacit. Germania, c. 45. Plin. Hist. Nat. xxxvii.
      13. The latter observed, with some humor, that even fashion had
      not yet found out the use of amber. Nero sent a Roman knight to
      purchase great quantities on the spot where it was produced, the
      coast of modern Prussia.]


      102 (return) [ Called Taprobana by the Romans, and Serindib by
      the Arabs. It was discovered under the reign of Claudius, and
      gradually became the principal mart of the East.]


      103 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. l. vi. Strabo, l. xvii.]


      104 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 224. A silk garment was
      considered as an ornament to a woman, but as a disgrace to a
      man.]


      105 (return) [ The two great pearl fisheries were the same as at
      present, Ormuz and Cape Comorin. As well as we can compare
      ancient with modern geography, Rome was supplied with diamonds
      from the mine of Jumelpur, in Bengal, which is described in the
      Voyages de Tavernier, tom. ii. p. 281.]


      1051 (return) [ Certainly not the only one. The Indians were not
      so contented with regard to foreign productions. Arrian has a
      long list of European wares, which they received in exchange for
      their own; Italian and other wines, brass, tin, lead, coral,
      chrysolith, storax, glass, dresses of one or many colors, zones,
      &c. See Periplus Maris Erythræi in Hudson, Geogr. Min. i. p.
      27.—W. The German translator observes that Gibbon has confined
      the use of aromatics to religious worship and funerals. His error
      seems the omission of other spices, of which the Romans must have
      consumed great quantities in their cookery. Wenck, however,
      admits that silver was the chief article of exchange.—M. In 1787,
      a peasant (near Nellore in the Carnatic) struck, in digging, on
      the remains of a Hindu temple; he found, also, a pot which
      contained Roman coins and medals of the second century, mostly
      Trajans, Adrians, and Faustinas, all of gold, many of them fresh
      and beautiful, others defaced or perforated, as if they had been
      worn as ornaments. (Asiatic Researches, ii. 19.)—M.]


      106 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. iii. 53. In a speech of Tiberius.]


      107 (return) [ Plin. Hist. Natur. xii. 18. In another place he
      computes half that sum; Quingenties H. S. for India exclusive of
      Arabia.]


      108 (return) [ The proportion, which was 1 to 10, and 12 1/2,
      rose to 14 2/5, the legal regulation of Constantine. See
      Arbuthnot’s Tables of ancient Coins, c. 5.]


      Notwithstanding the propensity of mankind to exalt the past, and
      to depreciate the present, the tranquil and prosperous state of
      the empire was warmly felt, and honestly confessed, by the
      provincials as well as Romans. “They acknowledged that the true
      principles of social life, laws, agriculture, and science, which
      had been first invented by the wisdom of Athens, were now firmly
      established by the power of Rome, under whose auspicious
      influence the fiercest barbarians were united by an equal
      government and common language. They affirm, that with the
      improvement of arts, the human species were visibly multiplied.
      They celebrate the increasing splendor of the cities, the
      beautiful face of the country, cultivated and adorned like an
      immense garden; and the long festival of peace which was enjoyed
      by so many nations, forgetful of the ancient animosities, and
      delivered from the apprehension of future danger.” 109 Whatever
      suspicions may be suggested by the air of rhetoric and
      declamation, which seems to prevail in these passages, the
      substance of them is perfectly agreeable to historic truth.


      109 (return) [ Among many other passages, see Pliny, (Hist.
      Natur. iii. 5.) Aristides, (de Urbe Roma,) and Tertullian, (de
      Anima, c. 30.)]


      It was scarcely possible that the eyes of contemporaries should
      discover in the public felicity the latent causes of decay and
      corruption. This long peace, and the uniform government of the
      Romans, introduced a slow and secret poison into the vitals of
      the empire. The minds of men were gradually reduced to the same
      level, the fire of genius was extinguished, and even the military
      spirit evaporated. The natives of Europe were brave and robust.
      Spain, Gaul, Britain, and Illyricum supplied the legions with
      excellent soldiers, and constituted the real strength of the
      monarchy. Their personal valor remained, but they no longer
      possessed that public courage which is nourished by the love of
      independence, the sense of national honor, the presence of
      danger, and the habit of command. They received laws and
      governors from the will of their sovereign, and trusted for their
      defence to a mercenary army. The posterity of their boldest
      leaders was contented with the rank of citizens and subjects. The
      most aspiring spirits resorted to the court or standard of the
      emperors; and the deserted provinces, deprived of political
      strength or union, insensibly sunk into the languid indifference
      of private life.


      The love of letters, almost inseparable from peace and
      refinement, was fashionable among the subjects of Hadrian and the
      Antonines, who were themselves men of learning and curiosity. It
      was diffused over the whole extent of their empire; the most
      northern tribes of Britons had acquired a taste for rhetoric;
      Homer as well as Virgil were transcribed and studied on the banks
      of the Rhine and Danube; and the most liberal rewards sought out
      the faintest glimmerings of literary merit. 110 The sciences of
      physic and astronomy were successfully cultivated by the Greeks;
      the observations of Ptolemy and the writings of Galen are studied
      by those who have improved their discoveries and corrected their
      errors; but if we except the inimitable Lucian, this age of
      indolence passed away without having produced a single writer of
      original genius, or who excelled in the arts of elegant
      composition.1101 The authority of Plato and Aristotle, of Zeno
      and Epicurus, still reigned in the schools; and their systems,
      transmitted with blind deference from one generation of disciples
      to another, precluded every generous attempt to exercise the
      powers, or enlarge the limits, of the human mind. The beauties of
      the poets and orators, instead of kindling a fire like their own,
      inspired only cold and servile imitations: or if any ventured to
      deviate from those models, they deviated at the same time from
      good sense and propriety. On the revival of letters, the youthful
      vigor of the imagination, after a long repose, national
      emulation, a new religion, new languages, and a new world, called
      forth the genius of Europe. But the provincials of Rome, trained
      by a uniform artificial foreign education, were engaged in a very
      unequal competition with those bold ancients, who, by expressing
      their genuine feelings in their native tongue, had already
      occupied every place of honor. The name of Poet was almost
      forgotten; that of Orator was usurped by the sophists. A cloud of
      critics, of compilers, of commentators, darkened the face of
      learning, and the decline of genius was soon followed by the
      corruption of taste.


      110 (return) [ Herodes Atticus gave the sophist Polemo above
      eight thousand pounds for three declamations. See Philostrat. l.
      i. p. 538. The Antonines founded a school at Athens, in which
      professors of grammar, rhetoric, politics, and the four great
      sects of philosophy were maintained at the public expense for the
      instruction of youth. The salary of a philosopher was ten
      thousand drachmæ, between three and four hundred pounds a year.
      Similar establishments were formed in the other great cities of
      the empire. See Lucian in Eunuch. tom. ii. p. 352, edit. Reitz.
      Philostrat. l. ii. p. 566. Hist. August. p. 21. Dion Cassius, l.
      lxxi. p. 1195. Juvenal himself, in a morose satire, which in
      every line betrays his own disappointment and envy, is obliged,
      however, to say,—“—O Juvenes, circumspicit et stimulat vos.
      Materiamque sibi Ducis indulgentia quærit.”—Satir. vii. 20. Note:
      Vespasian first gave a salary to professors: he assigned to each
      professor of rhetoric, Greek and Roman, centena sestertia.
      (Sueton. in Vesp. 18). Hadrian and the Antonines, though still
      liberal, were less profuse.—G. from W. Suetonius wrote annua
      centena L. 807, 5, 10.—M.]


      1101 (return) [ This judgment is rather severe: besides the
      physicians, astronomers, and grammarians, among whom there were
      some very distinguished men, there were still, under Hadrian,
      Suetonius, Florus, Plutarch; under the Antonines, Arrian,
      Pausanias, Appian, Marcus Aurelius himself, Sextus Empiricus, &c.
      Jurisprudence gained much by the labors of Salvius Julianus,
      Julius Celsus, Sex. Pomponius, Caius, and others.—G. from W. Yet
      where, among these, is the writer of original genius, unless,
      perhaps Plutarch? or even of a style really elegant?— M.]


      The sublime Longinus, who, in somewhat a later period, and in the
      court of a Syrian queen, preserved the spirit of ancient Athens,
      observes and laments this degeneracy of his contemporaries, which
      debased their sentiments, enervated their courage, and depressed
      their talents. “In the same manner,” says he, “as some children
      always remain pygmies, whose infant limbs have been too closely
      confined, thus our tender minds, fettered by the prejudices and
      habits of a just servitude, are unable to expand themselves, or
      to attain that well-proportioned greatness which we admire in the
      ancients; who, living under a popular government, wrote with the
      same freedom as they acted.” 111 This diminutive stature of
      mankind, if we pursue the metaphor, was daily sinking below the
      old standard, and the Roman world was indeed peopled by a race of
      pygmies; when the fierce giants of the north broke in, and mended
      the puny breed. They restored a manly spirit of freedom; and
      after the revolution of ten centuries, freedom became the happy
      parent of taste and science.


      111 (return) [ Longin. de Sublim. c. 44, p. 229, edit. Toll.
      Here, too, we may say of Longinus, “his own example strengthens
      all his laws.” Instead of proposing his sentiments with a manly
      boldness, he insinuates them with the most guarded caution; puts
      them into the mouth of a friend, and as far as we can collect
      from a corrupted text, makes a show of refuting them himself.]


      Chapter III: The Constitution In The Age Of The Antonines.—Part
      I.


Of The Constitution Of The Roman Empire, In The Age Of The Antonines.


      The obvious definition of a monarchy seems to be that of a state,
      in which a single person, by whatsoever name he may be
      distinguished, is intrusted with the execution of the laws, the
      management of the revenue, and the command of the army. But,
      unless public liberty is protected by intrepid and vigilant
      guardians, the authority of so formidable a magistrate will soon
      degenerate into despotism. The influence of the clergy, in an age
      of superstition, might be usefully employed to assert the rights
      of mankind; but so intimate is the connection between the throne
      and the altar, that the banner of the church has very seldom been
      seen on the side of the people. 101 A martial nobility and
      stubborn commons, possessed of arms, tenacious of property, and
      collected into constitutional assemblies, form the only balance
      capable of preserving a free constitution against enterprises of
      an aspiring prince.


      101 (return) [ Often enough in the ages of superstition, but not
      in the interest of the people or the state, but in that of the
      church to which all others were subordinate. Yet the power of the
      pope has often been of great service in repressing the excesses
      of sovereigns, and in softening manners.—W. The history of the
      Italian republics proves the error of Gibbon, and the justice of
      his German translator’s comment.—M.]


      Every barrier of the Roman constitution had been levelled by the
      vast ambition of the dictator; every fence had been extirpated by
      the cruel hand of the triumvir. After the victory of Actium, the
      fate of the Roman world depended on the will of Octavianus,
      surnamed Cæsar, by his uncle’s adoption, and afterwards Augustus,
      by the flattery of the senate. The conqueror was at the head of
      forty-four veteran legions, 1 conscious of their own strength,
      and of the weakness of the constitution, habituated, during
      twenty years’ civil war, to every act of blood and violence, and
      passionately devoted to the house of Cæsar, from whence alone
      they had received, and expected the most lavish rewards. The
      provinces, long oppressed by the ministers of the republic,
      sighed for the government of a single person, who would be the
      master, not the accomplice, of those petty tyrants. The people of
      Rome, viewing, with a secret pleasure, the humiliation of the
      aristocracy, demanded only bread and public shows; and were
      supplied with both by the liberal hand of Augustus. The rich and
      polite Italians, who had almost universally embraced the
      philosophy of Epicurus, enjoyed the present blessings of ease and
      tranquillity, and suffered not the pleasing dream to be
      interrupted by the memory of their old tumultuous freedom. With
      its power, the senate had lost its dignity; many of the most
      noble families were extinct. The republicans of spirit and
      ability had perished in the field of battle, or in the
      proscription. The door of the assembly had been designedly left
      open, for a mixed multitude of more than a thousand persons, who
      reflected disgrace upon their rank, instead of deriving honor
      from it. 2


      1 (return) [ Orosius, vi. 18. * Note: Dion says twenty-five, (or
      three,) (lv. 23.) The united triumvirs had but forty-three.
      (Appian. Bell. Civ. iv. 3.) The testimony of Orosius is of little
      value when more certain may be had.—W. But all the legions,
      doubtless, submitted to Augustus after the battle of Actium.—M.]


      2 (return) [ Julius Cæsar introduced soldiers, strangers, and
      half-barbarians into the senate (Sueton. in Cæsar. c. 77, 80.)
      The abuse became still more scandalous after his death.]


      The reformation of the senate was one of the first steps in which
      Augustus laid aside the tyrant, and professed himself the father
      of his country. He was elected censor; and, in concert with his
      faithful Agrippa, he examined the list of the senators, expelled
      a few members, 201 whose vices or whose obstinacy required a
      public example, persuaded near two hundred to prevent the shame
      of an expulsion by a voluntary retreat, raised the qualification
      of a senator to about ten thousand pounds, created a sufficient
      number of patrician families, and accepted for himself the
      honorable title of Prince of the Senate, 202 which had always
      been bestowed, by the censors, on the citizen the most eminent
      for his honors and services. 3 But whilst he thus restored the
      dignity, he destroyed the independence, of the senate. The
      principles of a free constitution are irrecoverably lost, when
      the legislative power is nominated by the executive.


      201 (return) [ Of these Dion and Suetonius knew nothing.—W. Dion
      says the contrary.—M.]


      202 (return) [ But Augustus, then Octavius, was censor, and in
      virtue of that office, even according to the constitution of the
      free republic, could reform the senate, expel unworthy members,
      name the Princeps Senatus, &c. That was called, as is well known,
      Senatum legere. It was customary, during the free republic, for
      the censor to be named Princeps Senatus, (S. Liv. l. xxvii. c.
      11, l. xl. c. 51;) and Dion expressly says, that this was done
      according to ancient usage. He was empowered by a decree of the
      senate to admit a number of families among the patricians.
      Finally, the senate was not the legislative power.—W]


      3 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. liii. p. 693. Suetonius in August.
      c. 35.]


      Before an assembly thus modelled and prepared, Augustus
      pronounced a studied oration, which displayed his patriotism, and
      disguised his ambition. “He lamented, yet excused, his past
      conduct. Filial piety had required at his hands the revenge of
      his father’s murder; the humanity of his own nature had sometimes
      given way to the stern laws of necessity, and to a forced
      connection with two unworthy colleagues: as long as Antony lived,
      the republic forbade him to abandon her to a degenerate Roman,
      and a barbarian queen. He was now at liberty to satisfy his duty
      and his inclination. He solemnly restored the senate and people
      to all their ancient rights; and wished only to mingle with the
      crowd of his fellow-citizens, and to share the blessings which he
      had obtained for his country.” 4


      4 (return) [ Dion (l. liii. p. 698) gives us a prolix and bombast
      speech on this great occasion. I have borrowed from Suetonius and
      Tacitus the general language of Augustus.]


      It would require the pen of Tacitus (if Tacitus had assisted at
      this assembly) to describe the various emotions of the senate,
      those that were suppressed, and those that were affected. It was
      dangerous to trust the sincerity of Augustus; to seem to distrust
      it was still more dangerous. The respective advantages of
      monarchy and a republic have often divided speculative inquirers;
      the present greatness of the Roman state, the corruption of
      manners, and the license of the soldiers, supplied new arguments
      to the advocates of monarchy; and these general views of
      government were again warped by the hopes and fears of each
      individual. Amidst this confusion of sentiments, the answer of
      the senate was unanimous and decisive. They refused to accept the
      resignation of Augustus; they conjured him not to desert the
      republic, which he had saved. After a decent resistance, the
      crafty tyrant submitted to the orders of the senate; and
      consented to receive the government of the provinces, and the
      general command of the Roman armies, under the well-known names
      of PROCONSUL and IMPERATOR. 5 But he would receive them only for
      ten years. Even before the expiration of that period, he hope
      that the wounds of civil discord would be completely healed, and
      that the republic, restored to its pristine health and vigor,
      would no longer require the dangerous interposition of so
      extraordinary a magistrate. The memory of this comedy, repeated
      several times during the life of Augustus, was preserved to the
      last ages of the empire, by the peculiar pomp with which the
      perpetual monarchs of Rome always solemnized the tenth years of
      their reign. 6


      5 (return) [ Imperator (from which we have derived Emperor)
      signified under her republic no more than general, and was
      emphatically bestowed by the soldiers, when on the field of
      battle they proclaimed their victorious leader worthy of that
      title. When the Roman emperors assumed it in that sense, they
      placed it after their name, and marked how often they had taken
      it.]


      6 (return) [ Dion. l. liii. p. 703, &c.]

