

      4 (return) [ The rights, powers, and pretensions of the sovereign
      of Olympus are very clearly described in the xvth book of the
      Iliad; in the Greek original, I mean; for Mr. Pope, without
      perceiving it, has improved the theology of Homer. * Note: There
      is a curious coincidence between Gibbon’s expressions and those
      of the newly-recovered “De Republica” of Cicero, though the
      argument is rather the converse, lib. i. c. 36. “Sive hæc ad
      utilitatem vitæ constitute sint a principibus rerum publicarum,
      ut rex putaretur unus esse in cœlo, qui nutu, ut ait Homerus,
      totum Olympum converteret, idemque et rex et patos haberetur
      omnium.”—M.]


      5 (return) [ See, for instance, Cæsar de Bell. Gall. vi. 17.
      Within a century or two, the Gauls themselves applied to their
      gods the names of Mercury, Mars, Apollo, &c.]


      The philosophers of Greece deduced their morals from the nature
      of man, rather than from that of God. They meditated, however, on
      the Divine Nature, as a very curious and important speculation;
      and in the profound inquiry, they displayed the strength and
      weakness of the human understanding. 6 Of the four most
      celebrated schools, the Stoics and the Platonists endeavored to
      reconcile the jaring interests of reason and piety. They have
      left us the most sublime proofs of the existence and perfections
      of the first cause; but, as it was impossible for them to
      conceive the creation of matter, the workman in the Stoic
      philosophy was not sufficiently distinguished from the work;
      whilst, on the contrary, the spiritual God of Plato and his
      disciples resembled an idea, rather than a substance. The
      opinions of the Academics and Epicureans were of a less religious
      cast; but whilst the modest science of the former induced them to
      doubt, the positive ignorance of the latter urged them to deny,
      the providence of a Supreme Ruler. The spirit of inquiry,
      prompted by emulation, and supported by freedom, had divided the
      public teachers of philosophy into a variety of contending sects;
      but the ingenious youth, who, from every part, resorted to
      Athens, and the other seats of learning in the Roman empire, were
      alike instructed in every school to reject and to despise the
      religion of the multitude. How, indeed, was it possible that a
      philosopher should accept, as divine truths, the idle tales of
      the poets, and the incoherent traditions of antiquity; or that he
      should adore, as gods, those imperfect beings whom he must have
      despised, as men? Against such unworthy adversaries, Cicero
      condescended to employ the arms of reason and eloquence; but the
      satire of Lucian was a much more adequate, as well as more
      efficacious, weapon. We may be well assured, that a writer,
      conversant with the world, would never have ventured to expose
      the gods of his country to public ridicule, had they not already
      been the objects of secret contempt among the polished and
      enlightened orders of society. 7


      6 (return) [ The admirable work of Cicero de Natura Deorum is the
      best clew we have to guide us through the dark and profound
      abyss. He represents with candor, and confutes with subtlety, the
      opinions of the philosophers.]


      7 (return) [ I do not pretend to assert, that, in this
      irreligious age, the natural terrors of superstition, dreams,
      omens, apparitions, &c., had lost their efficacy.]


      Notwithstanding the fashionable irreligion which prevailed in the
      age of the Antonines, both the interest of the priests and the
      credulity of the people were sufficiently respected. In their
      writings and conversation, the philosophers of antiquity asserted
      the independent dignity of reason; but they resigned their
      actions to the commands of law and of custom. Viewing, with a
      smile of pity and indulgence, the various errors of the vulgar,
      they diligently practised the ceremonies of their fathers,
      devoutly frequented the temples of the gods; and sometimes
      condescending to act a part on the theatre of superstition, they
      concealed the sentiments of an atheist under the sacerdotal
      robes. Reasoners of such a temper were scarcely inclined to
      wrangle about their respective modes of faith, or of worship. It
      was indifferent to them what shape the folly of the multitude
      might choose to assume; and they approached with the same inward
      contempt, and the same external reverence, the altars of the
      Libyan, the Olympian, or the Capitoline Jupiter. 8


      8 (return) [ Socrates, Epicurus, Cicero, and Plutarch always
      inculcated a decent reverence for the religion of their own
      country, and of mankind. The devotion of Epicurus was assiduous
      and exemplary. Diogen. Lært. x. 10.]


      It is not easy to conceive from what motives a spirit of
      persecution could introduce itself into the Roman councils. The
      magistrates could not be actuated by a blind, though honest
      bigotry, since the magistrates were themselves philosophers; and
      the schools of Athens had given laws to the senate. They could
      not be impelled by ambition or avarice, as the temporal and
      ecclesiastical powers were united in the same hands. The pontiffs
      were chosen among the most illustrious of the senators; and the
      office of Supreme Pontiff was constantly exercised by the
      emperors themselves. They knew and valued the advantages of
      religion, as it is connected with civil government. They
      encouraged the public festivals which humanize the manners of the
      people. They managed the arts of divination as a convenient
      instrument of policy; and they respected, as the firmest bond of
      society, the useful persuasion, that, either in this or in a
      future life, the crime of perjury is most assuredly punished by
      the avenging gods. 9 But whilst they acknowledged the general
      advantages of religion, they were convinced that the various
      modes of worship contributed alike to the same salutary purposes;
      and that, in every country, the form of superstition, which had
      received the sanction of time and experience, was the best
      adapted to the climate, and to its inhabitants. Avarice and taste
      very frequently despoiled the vanquished nations of the elegant
      statues of their gods, and the rich ornaments of their temples;
      10 but, in the exercise of the religion which they derived from
      their ancestors, they uniformly experienced the indulgence, and
      even protection, of the Roman conquerors. The province of Gaul
      seems, and indeed only seems, an exception to this universal
      toleration. Under the specious pretext of abolishing human
      sacrifices, the emperors Tiberius and Claudius suppressed the
      dangerous power of the Druids: 11 but the priests themselves,
      their gods and their altars, subsisted in peaceful obscurity till
      the final destruction of Paganism. 12


      9 (return) [ Polybius, l. vi. c. 53, 54. Juvenal, Sat. xiii.
      laments that in his time this apprehension had lost much of its
      effect.]


      10 (return) [ See the fate of Syracuse, Tarentum, Ambracia,
      Corinth, &c., the conduct of Verres, in Cicero, (Actio ii. Orat.
      4,) and the usual practice of governors, in the viiith Satire of
      Juvenal.]


      11 (return) [ Seuton. in Claud.—Plin. Hist. Nat. xxx. 1.]


      12 (return) [ Pelloutier, Histoire des Celtes, tom. vi. p.
      230—252.]


      Rome, the capital of a great monarchy, was incessantly filled
      with subjects and strangers from every part of the world, 13 who
      all introduced and enjoyed the favorite superstitions of their
      native country. 14 Every city in the empire was justified in
      maintaining the purity of its ancient ceremonies; and the Roman
      senate, using the common privilege, sometimes interposed, to
      check this inundation of foreign rites. 141 The Egyptian
      superstition, of all the most contemptible and abject, was
      frequently prohibited: the temples of Serapis and Isis
      demolished, and their worshippers banished from Rome and Italy.
      15 But the zeal of fanaticism prevailed over the cold and feeble
      efforts of policy. The exiles returned, the proselytes
      multiplied, the temples were restored with increasing splendor,
      and Isis and Serapis at length assumed their place among the
      Roman Deities. 151 16 Nor was this indulgence a departure from
      the old maxims of government. In the purest ages of the
      commonwealth, Cybele and Æsculapius had been invited by solemn
      embassies; 17 and it was customary to tempt the protectors of
      besieged cities, by the promise of more distinguished honors than
      they possessed in their native country. 18 Rome gradually became
      the common temple of her subjects; and the freedom of the city
      was bestowed on all the gods of mankind. 19


      13 (return) [ Seneca, Consolat. ad Helviam, p. 74. Edit., Lips.]


      14 (return) [ Dionysius Halicarn. Antiquitat. Roman. l. ii. (vol.
      i. p. 275, edit. Reiske.)]


      141 (return) [ Yet the worship of foreign gods at Rome was only
      guarantied to the natives of those countries from whence they
      came. The Romans administered the priestly offices only to the
      gods of their fathers. Gibbon, throughout the whole preceding
      sketch of the opinions of the Romans and their subjects, has
      shown through what causes they were free from religious hatred
      and its consequences. But, on the other hand the internal state
      of these religions, the infidelity and hypocrisy of the upper
      orders, the indifference towards all religion, in even the better
      part of the common people, during the last days of the republic,
      and under the Cæsars, and the corrupting principles of the
      philosophers, had exercised a very pernicious influence on the
      manners, and even on the constitution.—W.]


      15 (return) [ In the year of Rome 701, the temple of Isis and
      Serapis was demolished by the order of the Senate, (Dion Cassius,
      l. xl. p. 252,) and even by the hands of the consul, (Valerius
      Maximus, l. 3.) After the death of Cæsar it was restored at the
      public expense, (Dion. l. xlvii. p. 501.) When Augustus was in
      Egypt, he revered the majesty of Serapis, (Dion, l. li. p. 647;)
      but in the Pomærium of Rome, and a mile round it, he prohibited
      the worship of the Egyptian gods, (Dion, l. liii. p. 679; l. liv.
      p. 735.) They remained, however, very fashionable under his reign
      (Ovid. de Art. Amand. l. i.) and that of his successor, till the
      justice of Tiberius was provoked to some acts of severity. (See
      Tacit. Annal. ii. 85. Joseph. Antiquit. l. xviii. c. 3.) * Note:
      See, in the pictures from the walls of Pompeii, the
      representation of an Isiac temple and worship. Vestiges of
      Egyptian worship have been traced in Gaul, and, I am informed,
      recently in Britain, in excavations at York.— M.]


      151 (return) [ Gibbon here blends into one, two events, distant a
      hundred and sixty-six years from each other. It was in the year
      of Rome 535, that the senate having ordered the destruction of
      the temples of Isis and Serapis, the workman would lend his hand;
      and the consul, L. Paulus himself (Valer. Max. 1, 3) seized the
      axe, to give the first blow. Gibbon attribute this circumstance
      to the second demolition, which took place in the year 701 and
      which he considers as the first.—W.]


      16 (return) [ Tertullian in Apologetic. c. 6, p. 74. Edit.
      Havercamp. I am inclined to attribute their establishment to the
      devotion of the Flavian family.]


      17 (return) [ See Livy, l. xi. [Suppl.] and xxix.]


      18 (return) [ Macrob. Saturnalia, l. iii. c. 9. He gives us a
      form of evocation.]


      19 (return) [ Minutius Fælix in Octavio, p. 54. Arnobius, l. vi.
      p. 115.]


      II. The narrow policy of preserving, without any foreign mixture,
      the pure blood of the ancient citizens, had checked the fortune,
      and hastened the ruin, of Athens and Sparta. The aspiring genius
      of Rome sacrificed vanity to ambition, and deemed it more
      prudent, as well as honorable, to adopt virtue and merit for her
      own wheresoever they were found, among slaves or strangers,
      enemies or barbarians. 20 During the most flourishing æra of the
      Athenian commonwealth, the number of citizens gradually decreased
      from about thirty 21 to twenty-one thousand. 22 If, on the
      contrary, we study the growth of the Roman republic, we may
      discover, that, notwithstanding the incessant demands of wars and
      colonies, the citizens, who, in the first census of Servius
      Tullius, amounted to no more than eighty-three thousand, were
      multiplied, before the commencement of the social war, to the
      number of four hundred and sixty-three thousand men, able to bear
      arms in the service of their country. 23 When the allies of Rome
      claimed an equal share of honors and privileges, the senate
      indeed preferred the chance of arms to an ignominious concession.
      The Samnites and the Lucanians paid the severe penalty of their
      rashness; but the rest of the Italian states, as they
      successively returned to their duty, were admitted into the bosom
      of the republic, 24 and soon contributed to the ruin of public
      freedom. Under a democratical government, the citizens exercise
      the powers of sovereignty; and those powers will be first abused,
      and afterwards lost, if they are committed to an unwieldy
      multitude. But when the popular assemblies had been suppressed by
      the administration of the emperors, the conquerors were
      distinguished from the vanquished nations, only as the first and
      most honorable order of subjects; and their increase, however
      rapid, was no longer exposed to the same dangers. Yet the wisest
      princes, who adopted the maxims of Augustus, guarded with the
      strictest care the dignity of the Roman name, and diffused the
      freedom of the city with a prudent liberality. 25


      20 (return) [ Tacit. Annal. xi. 24. The Orbis Romanus of the
      learned Spanheim is a complete history of the progressive
      admission of Latium, Italy, and the provinces, to the freedom of
      Rome. * Note: Democratic states, observes Denina, (delle Revoluz.
      d’ Italia, l. ii. c. l.), are most jealous of communication the
      privileges of citizenship; monarchies or oligarchies willingly
      multiply the numbers of their free subjects. The most remarkable
      accessions to the strength of Rome, by the aggregation of
      conquered and foreign nations, took place under the regal and
      patrician—we may add, the Imperial government.—M.]


      21 (return) [ Herodotus, v. 97. It should seem, however, that he
      followed a large and popular estimation.]


      22 (return) [ Athenæus, Deipnosophist. l. vi. p. 272. Edit.
      Casaubon. Meursius de Fortunâ Atticâ, c. 4. * Note: On the number
      of citizens in Athens, compare Bœckh, Public Economy of Athens,
      (English Tr.,) p. 45, et seq. Fynes Clinton, Essay in Fasti Hel
      lenici, vol. i. 381.—M.]


      23 (return) [ See a very accurate collection of the numbers of
      each Lustrum in M. de Beaufort, Republique Romaine, l. iv. c. 4.
      Note: All these questions are placed in an entirely new point of
      view by Niebuhr, (Römische Geschichte, vol. i. p. 464.) He
      rejects the census of Servius fullius as unhistoric, (vol. ii. p.
      78, et seq.,) and he establishes the principle that the census
      comprehended all the confederate cities which had the right of
      Isopolity.—M.]


      24 (return) [ Appian. de Bell. Civil. l. i. Velleius Paterculus,
      l. ii. c. 15, 16, 17.]


      25 (return) [ Mæcenas had advised him to declare, by one edict,
      all his subjects citizens. But we may justly suspect that the
      historian Dion was the author of a counsel so much adapted to the
      practice of his own age, and so little to that of Augustus.]


      Chapter II: The Internal Prosperity In The Age Of The
      Antonines.—Part II.


      Till the privileges of Romans had been progressively extended to
      all the inhabitants of the empire, an important distinction was
      preserved between Italy and the provinces. The former was
      esteemed the centre of public unity, and the firm basis of the
      constitution. Italy claimed the birth, or at least the residence,
      of the emperors and the senate. 26 The estates of the Italians
      were exempt from taxes, their persons from the arbitrary
      jurisdiction of governors. Their municipal corporations, formed
      after the perfect model of the capital, 261 were intrusted, under
      the immediate eye of the supreme power, with the execution of the
      laws. From the foot of the Alps to the extremity of Calabria, all
      the natives of Italy were born citizens of Rome. Their partial
      distinctions were obliterated, and they insensibly coalesced into
      one great nation, united by language, manners, and civil
      institutions, and equal to the weight of a powerful empire. The
      republic gloried in her generous policy, and was frequently
      rewarded by the merit and services of her adopted sons. Had she
      always confined the distinction of Romans to the ancient families
      within the walls of the city, that immortal name would have been
      deprived of some of its noblest ornaments. Virgil was a native of
      Mantua; Horace was inclined to doubt whether he should call
      himself an Apulian or a Lucanian; it was in Padua that an
      historian was found worthy to record the majestic series of Roman
      victories. The patriot family of the Catos emerged from Tusculum;
      and the little town of Arpinum claimed the double honor of
      producing Marius and Cicero, the former of whom deserved, after
      Romulus and Camillus, to be styled the Third Founder of Rome; and
      the latter, after saving his country from the designs of
      Catiline, enabled her to contend with Athens for the palm of
      eloquence. 27


      26 (return) [ The senators were obliged to have one third of
      their own landed property in Italy. See Plin. l. vi. ep. 19. The
      qualification was reduced by Marcus to one fourth. Since the
      reign of Trajan, Italy had sunk nearer to the level of the
      provinces.]


      261 (return) [ It may be doubted whether the municipal government
      of the cities was not the old Italian constitution rather than a
      transcript from that of Rome. The free government of the cities,
      observes Savigny, was the leading characteristic of Italy.
      Geschichte des Römischen Rechts, i. p. G.—M.]


      27 (return) [ The first part of the Verona Illustrata of the
      Marquis Maffei gives the clearest and most comprehensive view of
      the state of Italy under the Cæsars. * Note: Compare Denina,
      Revol. d’ Italia, l. ii. c. 6, p. 100, 4 to edit.]


      The provinces of the empire (as they have been described in the
      preceding chapter) were destitute of any public force, or
      constitutional freedom. In Etruria, in Greece, 28 and in Gaul, 29
      it was the first care of the senate to dissolve those dangerous
      confederacies, which taught mankind that, as the Roman arms
      prevailed by division, they might be resisted by union. Those
      princes, whom the ostentation of gratitude or generosity
      permitted for a while to hold a precarious sceptre, were
      dismissed from their thrones, as soon as they had performed their
      appointed task of fashioning to the yoke the vanquished nations.
      The free states and cities which had embraced the cause of Rome
      were rewarded with a nominal alliance, and insensibly sunk into
      real servitude. The public authority was everywhere exercised by
      the ministers of the senate and of the emperors, and that
      authority was absolute, and without control. 291 But the same
      salutary maxims of government, which had secured the peace and
      obedience of Italy were extended to the most distant conquests. A
      nation of Romans was gradually formed in the provinces, by the
      double expedient of introducing colonies, and of admitting the
      most faithful and deserving of the provincials to the freedom of
      Rome.


      28 (return) [ See Pausanias, l. vii. The Romans condescended to
      restore the names of those assemblies, when they could no longer
      be dangerous.]


      29 (return) [ They are frequently mentioned by Cæsar. The Abbé
      Dubos attempts, with very little success, to prove that the
      assemblies of Gaul were continued under the emperors. Histoire de
      l’Etablissement de la Monarchie Francoise, l. i. c. 4.]


      291 (return) [ This is, perhaps, rather overstated. Most cities
      retained the choice of their municipal officers: some retained
      valuable privileges; Athens, for instance, in form was still a
      confederate city. (Tac. Ann. ii. 53.) These privileges, indeed,
      depended entirely on the arbitrary will of the emperor, who
      revoked or restored them according to his caprice. See Walther
      Geschichte des Römischen Rechts, i. 324—an admirable summary of
      the Roman constitutional history.—M.]
