
      39 (return) [ Dion, (l. lxx. p. 1171.) Aurel. Victor.]


      The caprice of Hadrian influenced his choice of a successor.


      After revolving in his mind several men of distinguished merit,
      whom he esteemed and hated, he adopted Ælius Verus a gay and
      voluptuous nobleman, recommended by uncommon beauty to the lover
      of Antinous. 40 But whilst Hadrian was delighting himself with
      his own applause, and the acclamations of the soldiers, whose
      consent had been secured by an immense donative, the new Cæsar 41
      was ravished from his embraces by an untimely death. He left only
      one son. Hadrian commended the boy to the gratitude of the
      Antonines. He was adopted by Pius; and, on the accession of
      Marcus, was invested with an equal share of sovereign power.
      Among the many vices of this younger Verus, he possessed one
      virtue; a dutiful reverence for his wiser colleague, to whom he
      willingly abandoned the ruder cares of empire. The philosophic
      emperor dissembled his follies, lamented his early death, and
      cast a decent veil over his memory.


      40 (return) [ The deification of Antinous, his medals, his
      statues, temples, city, oracles, and constellation, are well
      known, and still dishonor the memory of Hadrian. Yet we may
      remark, that of the first fifteen emperors, Claudius was the only
      one whose taste in love was entirely correct. For the honors of
      Antinous, see Spanheim, Commentaire sui les Cæsars de Julien, p.
      80.]


      41 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 13. Aurelius Victor in Epitom.]


      As soon as Hadrian’s passion was either gratified or
      disappointed, he resolved to deserve the thanks of posterity, by
      placing the most exalted merit on the Roman throne. His
      discerning eye easily discovered a senator about fifty years of
      age, blameless in all the offices of life; and a youth of about
      seventeen, whose riper years opened a fair prospect of every
      virtue: the elder of these was declared the son and successor of
      Hadrian, on condition, however, that he himself should
      immediately adopt the younger. The two Antonines (for it is of
      them that we are now speaking,) governed the Roman world
      forty-two years, with the same invariable spirit of wisdom and
      virtue. Although Pius had two sons, 42 he preferred the welfare
      of Rome to the interest of his family, gave his daughter
      Faustina, in marriage to young Marcus, obtained from the senate
      the tribunitian and proconsular powers, and, with a noble
      disdain, or rather ignorance of jealousy, associated him to all
      the labors of government. Marcus, on the other hand, revered the
      character of his benefactor, loved him as a parent, obeyed him as
      his sovereign, 43 and, after he was no more, regulated his own
      administration by the example and maxims of his predecessor.
      Their united reigns are possibly the only period of history in
      which the happiness of a great people was the sole object of
      government.


      42 (return) [ Without the help of medals and inscriptions, we
      should be ignorant of this fact, so honorable to the memory of
      Pius. Note: Gibbon attributes to Antoninus Pius a merit which he
      either did not possess, or was not in a situation to display.


      1. He was adopted only on the condition that he would adopt, in
      his turn, Marcus Aurelius and L. Verus.


      2. His two sons died children, and one of them, M. Galerius,
      alone, appears to have survived, for a few years, his father’s
      coronation. Gibbon is also mistaken when he says (note 42) that
      “without the help of medals and inscriptions, we should be
      ignorant that Antoninus had two sons.” Capitolinus says
      expressly, (c. 1,) Filii mares duo, duæ-fœminæ; we only owe their
      names to the medals. Pagi. Cont. Baron, i. 33, edit Paris.—W.]


      43 (return) [ During the twenty-three years of Pius’s reign,
      Marcus was only two nights absent from the palace, and even those
      were at different times. Hist. August. p. 25.]


      Titus Antoninus Pius has been justly denominated a second Numa.
      The same love of religion, justice, and peace, was the
      distinguishing characteristic of both princes. But the situation
      of the latter opened a much larger field for the exercise of
      those virtues. Numa could only prevent a few neighboring villages
      from plundering each other’s harvests. Antoninus diffused order
      and tranquillity over the greatest part of the earth. His reign
      is marked by the rare advantage of furnishing very few materials
      for history; which is, indeed, little more than the register of
      the crimes, follies, and misfortunes of mankind. In private life,
      he was an amiable, as well as a good man. The native simplicity
      of his virtue was a stranger to vanity or affectation. He enjoyed
      with moderation the conveniences of his fortune, and the innocent
      pleasures of society; 44 and the benevolence of his soul
      displayed itself in a cheerful serenity of temper.


      44 (return) [ He was fond of the theatre, and not insensible to
      the charms of the fair sex. Marcus Antoninus, i. 16. Hist.
      August. p. 20, 21. Julian in Cæsar.]


      The virtue of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus was of severer and more
      laborious kind. 45 It was the well-earned harvest of many a
      learned conference, of many a patient lecture, and many a
      midnight lucubration. At the age of twelve years he embraced the
      rigid system of the Stoics, which taught him to submit his body
      to his mind, his passions to his reason; to consider virtue as
      the only good, vice as the only evil, all things external as
      things indifferent. 46 His meditations, composed in the tumult of
      the camp, are still extant; and he even condescended to give
      lessons of philosophy, in a more public manner than was perhaps
      consistent with the modesty of sage, or the dignity of an
      emperor. 47 But his life was the noblest commentary on the
      precepts of Zeno. He was severe to himself, indulgent to the
      imperfections of others, just and beneficent to all mankind. He
      regretted that Avidius Cassius, who excited a rebellion in Syria,
      had disappointed him, by a voluntary death, 471 of the pleasure
      of converting an enemy into a friend;; and he justified the
      sincerity of that sentiment, by moderating the zeal of the senate
      against the adherents of the traitor. 48 War he detested, as the
      disgrace and calamity of human nature; 481 but when the necessity
      of a just defence called upon him to take up arms, he readily
      exposed his person to eight winter campaigns, on the frozen banks
      of the Danube, the severity of which was at last fatal to the
      weakness of his constitution. His memory was revered by a
      grateful posterity, and above a century after his death, many
      persons preserved the image of Marcus Antoninus among those of
      their household gods. 49


      45 (return) [ The enemies of Marcus charged him with hypocrisy,
      and with a want of that simplicity which distinguished Pius and
      even Verus. (Hist. August. 6, 34.) This suspicions, unjust as it
      was, may serve to account for the superior applause bestowed upon
      personal qualifications, in preference to the social virtues.
      Even Marcus Antoninus has been called a hypocrite; but the
      wildest scepticism never insinuated that Cæsar might probably be
      a coward, or Tully a fool. Wit and valor are qualifications more
      easily ascertained than humanity or the love of justice.]


      46 (return) [ Tacitus has characterized, in a few words, the
      principles of the portico: Doctores sapientiæ secutus est, qui
      sola bona quæ honesta, main tantum quæ turpia; potentiam,
      nobilitatem, æteraque extra... bonis neque malis adnumerant.
      Tacit. Hist. iv. 5.]


      47 (return) [ Before he went on the second expedition against the
      Germans, he read lectures of philosophy to the Roman people,
      during three days. He had already done the same in the cities of
      Greece and Asia. Hist. August. in Cassio, c. 3.]


      471 (return) [ Cassius was murdered by his own partisans. Vulcat.
      Gallic. in Cassio, c. 7. Dion, lxxi. c. 27.—W.]


      48 (return) [ Dion, l. lxxi. p. 1190. Hist. August. in Avid.
      Cassio. Note: See one of the newly discovered passages of Dion
      Cassius. Marcus wrote to the senate, who urged the execution of
      the partisans of Cassius, in these words: “I entreat and beseech
      you to preserve my reign unstained by senatorial blood. None of
      your order must perish either by your desire or mine.” Mai.
      Fragm. Vatican. ii. p. 224.—M.]


      481 (return) [ Marcus would not accept the services of any of the
      barbarian allies who crowded to his standard in the war against
      Avidius Cassius. “Barbarians,” he said, with wise but vain
      sagacity, “must not become acquainted with the dissensions of the
      Roman people.” Mai. Fragm Vatican l. 224.—M.]


      49 (return) [ Hist. August. in Marc. Antonin. c. 18.]


      If a man were called to fix the period in the history of the
      world, during which the condition of the human race was most
      happy and prosperous, he would, without hesitation, name that
      which elapsed from the death of Domitian to the accession of
      Commodus. The vast extent of the Roman empire was governed by
      absolute power, under the guidance of virtue and wisdom. The
      armies were restrained by the firm but gentle hand of four
      successive emperors, whose characters and authority commanded
      involuntary respect. The forms of the civil administration were
      carefully preserved by Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, and the Antonines,
      who delighted in the image of liberty, and were pleased with
      considering themselves as the accountable ministers of the laws.
      Such princes deserved the honor of restoring the republic, had
      the Romans of their days been capable of enjoying a rational
      freedom.


      The labors of these monarchs were overpaid by the immense reward
      that inseparably waited on their success; by the honest pride of
      virtue, and by the exquisite delight of beholding the general
      happiness of which they were the authors. A just but melancholy
      reflection imbittered, however, the noblest of human enjoyments.
      They must often have recollected the instability of a happiness
      which depended on the character of single man. The fatal moment
      was perhaps approaching, when some licentious youth, or some
      jealous tyrant, would abuse, to the destruction, that absolute
      power, which they had exerted for the benefit of their people.
      The ideal restraints of the senate and the laws might serve to
      display the virtues, but could never correct the vices, of the
      emperor. The military force was a blind and irresistible
      instrument of oppression; and the corruption of Roman manners
      would always supply flatterers eager to applaud, and ministers
      prepared to serve, the fear or the avarice, the lust or the
      cruelty, of their master. These gloomy apprehensions had been
      already justified by the experience of the Romans. The annals of
      the emperors exhibit a strong and various picture of human
      nature, which we should vainly seek among the mixed and doubtful
      characters of modern history. In the conduct of those monarchs we
      may trace the utmost lines of vice and virtue; the most exalted
      perfection, and the meanest degeneracy of our own species. The
      golden age of Trajan and the Antonines had been preceded by an
      age of iron. It is almost superfluous to enumerate the unworthy
      successors of Augustus. Their unparalleled vices, and the
      splendid theatre on which they were acted, have saved them from
      oblivion. The dark, unrelenting Tiberius, the furious Caligula,
      the feeble Claudius, the profligate and cruel Nero, the beastly
      Vitellius, 50 and the timid, inhuman Domitian, are condemned to
      everlasting infamy. During fourscore years (excepting only the
      short and doubtful respite of Vespasian’s reign) 51 Rome groaned
      beneath an unremitting tyranny, which exterminated the ancient
      families of the republic, and was fatal to almost every virtue
      and every talent that arose in that unhappy period.


      50 (return) [ Vitellius consumed in mere eating at least six
      millions of our money in about seven months. It is not easy to
      express his vices with dignity, or even decency. Tacitus fairly
      calls him a hog, but it is by substituting for a coarse word a
      very fine image. “At Vitellius, umbraculis hortorum abditus, ut
      ignava animalia, quibus si cibum suggeras, jacent torpentque,
      præterita, instantia, futura, pari oblivione dimiserat. Atque
      illum nemore Aricino desidem et marcentum,” &c. Tacit. Hist. iii.
      36, ii. 95. Sueton. in Vitell. c. 13. Dion. Cassius, l xv. p.
      1062.]


      51 (return) [ The execution of Helvidius Priscus, and of the
      virtuous Eponina, disgraced the reign of Vespasian.]


      Under the reign of these monsters, the slavery of the Romans was
      accompanied with two peculiar circumstances, the one occasioned
      by their former liberty, the other by their extensive conquests,
      which rendered their condition more completely wretched than that
      of the victims of tyranny in any other age or country. From these
      causes were derived, 1. The exquisite sensibility of the
      sufferers; and, 2. The impossibility of escaping from the hand of
      the oppressor.


      I. When Persia was governed by the descendants of Sefi, a race of
      princes whose wanton cruelty often stained their divan, their
      table, and their bed, with the blood of their favorites, there is
      a saying recorded of a young nobleman, that he never departed
      from the sultan’s presence, without satisfying himself whether
      his head was still on his shoulders. The experience of every day
      might almost justify the scepticism of Rustan. 52 Yet the fatal
      sword, suspended above him by a single thread, seems not to have
      disturbed the slumbers, or interrupted the tranquillity, of the
      Persian. The monarch’s frown, he well knew, could level him with
      the dust; but the stroke of lightning or apoplexy might be
      equally fatal; and it was the part of a wise man to forget the
      inevitable calamities of human life in the enjoyment of the
      fleeting hour. He was dignified with the appellation of the
      king’s slave; had, perhaps, been purchased from obscure parents,
      in a country which he had never known; and was trained up from
      his infancy in the severe discipline of the seraglio. 53 His
      name, his wealth, his honors, were the gift of a master, who
      might, without injustice, resume what he had bestowed. Rustan’s
      knowledge, if he possessed any, could only serve to confirm his
      habits by prejudices. His language afforded not words for any
      form of government, except absolute monarchy. The history of the
      East informed him, that such had ever been the condition of
      mankind. 54 The Koran, and the interpreters of that divine book,
      inculcated to him, that the sultan was the descendant of the
      prophet, and the vicegerent of heaven; that patience was the
      first virtue of a Mussulman, and unlimited obedience the great
      duty of a subject.


      52 (return) [ Voyage de Chardin en Perse, vol. iii. p. 293.]


      53 (return) [ The practice of raising slaves to the great offices
      of state is still more common among the Turks than among the
      Persians. The miserable countries of Georgia and Circassia supply
      rulers to the greatest part of the East.]


      54 (return) [ Chardin says, that European travellers have
      diffused among the Persians some ideas of the freedom and
      mildness of our governments. They have done them a very ill
      office.]


      The minds of the Romans were very differently prepared for
      slavery. Oppressed beneath the weight of their own corruption and
      of military violence, they for a long while preserved the
      sentiments, or at least the ideas, of their free-born ancestors.
      The education of Helvidius and Thrasea, of Tacitus and Pliny, was
      the same as that of Cato and Cicero. From Grecian philosophy,
      they had imbibed the justest and most liberal notions of the
      dignity of human nature, and the origin of civil society. The
      history of their own country had taught them to revere a free, a
      virtuous, and a victorious commonwealth; to abhor the successful
      crimes of Cæsar and Augustus; and inwardly to despise those
      tyrants whom they adored with the most abject flattery. As
      magistrates and senators they were admitted into the great
      council, which had once dictated laws to the earth, whose
      authority was so often prostituted to the vilest purposes of
      tyranny. Tiberius, and those emperors who adopted his maxims,
      attempted to disguise their murders by the formalities of
      justice, and perhaps enjoyed a secret pleasure in rendering the
      senate their accomplice as well as their victim. By this
      assembly, the last of the Romans were condemned for imaginary
      crimes and real virtues. Their infamous accusers assumed the
      language of independent patriots, who arraigned a dangerous
      citizen before the tribunal of his country; and the public
      service was rewarded by riches and honors. 55 The servile judges
      professed to assert the majesty of the commonwealth, violated in
      the person of its first magistrate, 56 whose clemency they most
      applauded when they trembled the most at his inexorable and
      impending cruelty. 57 The tyrant beheld their baseness with just
      contempt, and encountered their secret sentiments of detestation
      with sincere and avowed hatred for the whole body of the senate.


      55 (return) [ They alleged the example of Scipio and Cato,
      (Tacit. Annal. iii. 66.) Marcellus Epirus and Crispus Vibius had
      acquired two millions and a half under Nero. Their wealth, which
      aggravated their crimes, protected them under Vespasian. See
      Tacit. Hist. iv. 43. Dialog. de Orator. c. 8. For one accusation,
      Regulus, the just object of Pliny’s satire, received from the
      senate the consular ornaments, and a present of sixty thousand
      pounds.]


      56 (return) [ The crime of majesty was formerly a treasonable
      offence against the Roman people. As tribunes of the people,
      Augustus and Tiberius applied tit to their own persons, and
      extended it to an infinite latitude. Note: It was Tiberius, not
      Augustus, who first took in this sense the words crimen læsæ
      majestatis. Bachii Trajanus, 27. —W.]


      57 (return) [ After the virtuous and unfortunate widow of
      Germanicus had been put to death, Tiberius received the thanks of
      the senate for his clemency. she had not been publicly strangled;
      nor was the body drawn with a hook to the Gemoniæ, where those of
      common male factors were exposed. See Tacit. Annal. vi. 25.
      Sueton. in Tiberio c. 53.]


      II. The division of Europe into a number of independent states,
      connected, however, with each other by the general resemblance of
      religion, language, and manners, is productive of the most
      beneficial consequences to the liberty of mankind. A modern
      tyrant, who should find no resistance either in his own breast,
      or in his people, would soon experience a gentle restraint from
      the example of his equals, the dread of present censure, the
      advice of his allies, and the apprehension of his enemies. The
      object of his displeasure, escaping from the narrow limits of his
      dominions, would easily obtain, in a happier climate, a secure
      refuge, a new fortune adequate to his merit, the freedom of
      complaint, and perhaps the means of revenge. But the empire of
      the Romans filled the world, and when the empire fell into the
      hands of a single person, the world became a safe and dreary
      prison for his enemies. The slave of Imperial despotism, whether
      he was condemned to drag his gilded chain in rome and the senate,
      or to were out a life of exile on the barren rock of Seriphus, or
      the frozen bank of the Danube, expected his fate in silent
      despair. 58 To resist was fatal, and it was impossible to fly. On
      every side he was encompassed with a vast extent of sea and land,
      which he could never hope to traverse without being discovered,
      seized, and restored to his irritated master. Beyond the
      frontiers, his anxious view could discover nothing, except the
      ocean, inhospitable deserts, hostile tribes of barbarians, of
      fierce manners and unknown language, or dependent kings, who
      would gladly purchase the emperor’s protection by the sacrifice
      of an obnoxious fugitive. 59 “Wherever you are,” said Cicero to
      the exiled Marcellus, “remember that you are equally within the
      power of the conqueror.” 60


      58 (return) [ Seriphus was a small rocky island in the Ægean Sea,
      the inhabitants of which were despised for their ignorance and
      obscurity. The place of Ovid’s exile is well known, by his just,
      but unmanly lamentations. It should seem, that he only received
      an order to leave rome in so many days, and to transport himself
      to Tomi. Guards and jailers were unnecessary.]


      59 (return) [ Under Tiberius, a Roman knight attempted to fly to
      the Parthians. He was stopped in the straits of Sicily; but so
      little danger did there appear in the example, that the most
      jealous of tyrants disdained to punish it. Tacit. Annal. vi. 14.]


      60 (return) [ Cicero ad Familiares, iv. 7.]


      Chapter IV: The Cruelty, Follies And Murder Of Commodus.—Part I.


The Cruelty, Follies, And Murder Of Commodus—Election Of Pertinax—His
Attempts To Reform The State—His Assassination By The Prætorian Guards.


      The mildness of Marcus, which the rigid discipline of the Stoics
      was unable to eradicate, formed, at the same time, the most
      amiable, and the only defective part of his character. His
      excellent understanding was often deceived by the unsuspecting
      goodness of his heart. Artful men, who study the passions of
      princes, and conceal their own, approached his person in the
      disguise of philosophic sanctity, and acquired riches and honors
      by affecting to despise them. 1 His excessive indulgence to his
      brother, 105 his wife, and his son, exceeded the bounds of
      private virtue, and became a public injury, by the example and
      consequences of their vices.


      1 (return) [ See the complaints of Avidius Cassius, Hist. August.
      p. 45. These are, it is true, the complaints of faction; but even
      faction exaggerates, rather than invents.]


      105 (return) [ His brother by adoption, and his colleague, L.
      Verus. Marcus Aurelius had no other brother.—W.]


      Faustina, the daughter of Pius and the wife of Marcus, has been
      as much celebrated for her gallantries as for her beauty. The
      grave simplicity of the philosopher was ill calculated to engage
      her wanton levity, or to fix that unbounded passion for variety,
      which often discovered personal merit in the meanest of mankind.
      2 The Cupid of the ancients was, in general, a very sensual
      deity; and the amours of an empress, as they exact on her side
      the plainest advances, are seldom susceptible of much sentimental
      delicacy. Marcus was the only man in the empire who seemed
      ignorant or insensible of the irregularities of Faustina; which,
      according to the prejudices of every age, reflected some disgrace
      on the injured husband. He promoted several of her lovers to
      posts of honor and profit, 3 and during a connection of thirty
      years, invariably gave her proofs of the most tender confidence,
      and of a respect which ended not with her life. In his
      Meditations, he thanks the gods, who had bestowed on him a wife
      so faithful, so gentle, and of such a wonderful simplicity of
      manners. 4 The obsequious senate, at his earnest request,
      declared her a goddess. She was represented in her temples, with
      the attributes of Juno, Venus, and Ceres; and it was decreed,
      that, on the day of their nuptials, the youth of either sex
      should pay their vows before the altar of their chaste patroness.
      5


      2 (return) [ Faustinam satis constat apud Cajetam conditiones
      sibi et nauticas et gladiatorias, elegisse. Hist. August. p. 30.
      Lampridius explains the sort of merit which Faustina chose, and
      the conditions which she exacted. Hist. August. p. 102.]


      3 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 34.]


      4 (return) [ Meditat. l. i. The world has laughed at the
      credulity of Marcus but Madam Dacier assures us, (and we may
      credit a lady,) that the husband will always be deceived, if the
      wife condescends to dissemble.]


      5 (return) [Footnote 5: Dion Cassius, l. lxxi. [c. 31,] p. 1195.
      Hist. August. p. 33. Commentaire de Spanheim sur les Cæsars de
      Julien, p. 289. The deification of Faustina is the only defect
      which Julian’s criticism is able to discover in the
      all-accomplished character of Marcus.]


      The monstrous vices of the son have cast a shade on the purity of
      the father’s virtues. It has been objected to Marcus, that he
      sacrificed the happiness of millions to a fond partiality for a
      worthless boy; and that he chose a successor in his own family,
      rather than in the republic. Nothing however, was neglected by
      the anxious father, and by the men of virtue and learning whom he
      summoned to his assistance, to expand the narrow mind of young
      Commodus, to correct his growing vices, and to render him worthy
      of the throne for which he was designed. But the power of
      instruction is seldom of much efficacy, except in those happy
      dispositions where it is almost superfluous. The distasteful
      lesson of a grave philosopher was, in a moment, obliterated by
      the whisper of a profligate favorite; and Marcus himself blasted
      the fruits of this labored education, by admitting his son, at
      the age of fourteen or fifteen, to a full participation of the
      Imperial power. He lived but four years afterwards: but he lived
      long enough to repent a rash measure, which raised the impetuous
      youth above the restraint of reason and authority.


      Most of the crimes which disturb the internal peace of society,
      are produced by the restraints which the necessary but unequal
      laws of property have imposed on the appetites of mankind, by
      confining to a few the possession of those objects that are
      coveted by many. Of all our passions and appetites, the love of
      power is of the most imperious and unsociable nature, since the
      pride of one man requires the submission of the multitude. In the
      tumult of civil discord, the laws of society lose their force,
      and their place is seldom supplied by those of humanity. The
      ardor of contention, the pride of victory, the despair of
      success, the memory of past injuries, and the fear of future
      dangers, all contribute to inflame the mind, and to silence the
      voice of pity. From such motives almost every page of history has
      been stained with civil blood; but these motives will not account
      for the unprovoked cruelties of Commodus, who had nothing to wish
      and every thing to enjoy. The beloved son of Marcus succeeded to
      his father, amidst the acclamations of the senate and armies; 6
      and when he ascended the throne, the happy youth saw round him
      neither competitor to remove, nor enemies to punish. In this
      calm, elevated station, it was surely natural that he should
      prefer the love of mankind to their detestation, the mild glories
      of his five predecessors to the ignominious fate of Nero and
      Domitian.


      6 (return) [ Commodus was the first _Porphyrogenitus_, (born
      since his father’s accession to the throne.) By a new strain of
      flattery, the Egyptian medals date by the years of his life; as
      if they were synonymous to those of his reign. Tillemont, Hist.
      des Empereurs, tom. ii. p. 752.]


      Yet Commodus was not, as he has been represented, a tiger born
      with an insatiate thirst of human blood, and capable, from his
      infancy, of the most inhuman actions. 7 Nature had formed him of
      a weak rather than a wicked disposition. His simplicity and
      timidity rendered him the slave of his attendants, who gradually
      corrupted his mind. His cruelty, which at first obeyed the
      dictates of others, degenerated into habit, and at length became
      the ruling passion of his soul. 8


      7 (return) [ Hist. August. p. 46.]


      8 (return) [ Dion Cassius, l. lxxii. p. 1203.]


      Upon the death of his father, Commodus found himself embarrassed
      with the command of a great army, and the conduct of a difficult
      war against the Quadi and Marcomanni. 9 The servile and
      profligate youths whom Marcus had banished, soon regained their
      station and influence about the new emperor. They exaggerated the
      hardships and dangers of a campaign in the wild countries beyond
      the Danube; and they assured the indolent prince that the terror
      of his name, and the arms of his lieutenants, would be sufficient
      to complete the conquest of the dismayed barbarians, or to impose
      such conditions as were more advantageous than any conquest. By a
      dexterous application to his sensual appetites, they compared the
      tranquillity, the splendor, the refined pleasures of Rome, with
      the tumult of a Pannonian camp, which afforded neither leisure
      nor materials for luxury. 10 Commodus listened to the pleasing
      advice; but whilst he hesitated between his own inclination and
      the awe which he still retained for his father’s counsellors, the
      summer insensibly elapsed, and his triumphal entry into the
      capital was deferred till the autumn. His graceful person, 11
      popular address, and imagined virtues, attracted the public
      favor; the honorable peace which he had recently granted to the
      barbarians, diffused a universal joy; 12 his impatience to
      revisit Rome was fondly ascribed to the love of his country; and
      his dissolute course of amusements was faintly condemned in a
      prince of nineteen years of age.


      9 (return) [ According to Tertullian, (Apolog. c. 25,) he died at
      Sirmium. But the situation of Vindobona, or Vienna, where both
      the Victors place his death, is better adapted to the operations
      of the war against the Marcomanni and Quadi.]


      10 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 12.]


      11 (return) [ Herodian, l. i. p. 16.]


      12 (return) [ This universal joy is well described (from the
      medals as well as historians) by Mr. Wotton, Hist. of Rome, p.
      192, 193.] During the three first years of his reign, the forms,
      and even the spirit, of the old administration, were maintained
      by those faithful counsellors, to whom Marcus had recommended his
      son, and for whose wisdom and integrity Commodus still
      entertained a reluctant esteem. The young prince and his
      profligate favorites revelled in all the license of sovereign
      power; but his hands were yet unstained with blood; and he had
      even displayed a generosity of sentiment, which might perhaps
      have ripened into solid virtue. 13 A fatal incident decided his
      fluctuating character.

